
THE KARNATAKA FOREST CODE, 1976
CHAPTER I
Organisation of the Forest Department
A. General
1. Extent of application of the Code,- The rules contained in this Code
are applicable to the Forest Department in the territories subject to the
Government of Karnataka hereinafter referred to as 'the Government'.
2. Division of the State into Circles and Divisions.- The Administrative
head of the Department is the Chief Conservator of Forests (General) who
is also the professional adviser of the Government in all matters relating to
the Department. For territorial administrative purposes of the Department,
the State is divided into seven territorial Circles, besides three special
Circles, namely, the Conservator of Forests Wild-life Circle who is also the
Chief Wildlife Warden of the State, Conservator of Forest Research and
Utilisation Circle and Field Director, Project Tiger. To deal with the matters
concerning Rubber, Coco, Working Plans and other subjects referred to by
Government from time to time, a Special Chief Conservator of Forests
(Dev.) who is also a major Head of the Department and professional
Adviser concerning the subjects entrusted to him by the Government is
also functioning. For administrative convenience, the Special Chief
Conservator of Forests (Dev.) has two Circles namely, Working Plans and
Development Circle and Rubber Plantation Circle.
Each Circle is divided into a number of Forest Divisions. Table 1 gives the
names of the Circle charges with their Headquarters, the forest Divisions
comprised in each Circle and also their Headquarters.
3. The Chief Conservator of Forests (General) is assisted by the
following Officers at Headquarters.
1. Conservator of Forests (Headquarters).
2. Deputy Conservator of Forests (Headquarters).
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

3. Financial Assistant
4. Gazetted Manager.
4. The Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) is assisted by the
following Officers at Headquarters.
1. T.A. to the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.);
2. Gazetted Manager.
5. General control of Forests.- The general administration, of the Reserve
Forests, Protected Forests and such other lands placed at the disposal of
the Forest Department in the whole State is under the control of the Chief
Conservator of Forests (Genl.) who is also the Head of the Forest Department in Karnataka. The orders of Government on Forest business will be
issued from the Food and Forest Secretariat to which all correspondence
on such matters should be addressed.
6. Administrative charges.- To perform the various functions concerning
forest administration, the following 4 categories of charges are involved.
1. Controlling charges;
2. Executive charges;
3. Protective charges;
4. Research Charges.
A Circle includes a number of forest divisions. A certain number of ranges
make up a forest division. A range comprises of a number of beats and
certain number of beats make up a Section. These charges will ordinarily
be held by the following Classes of Officers. 1. Conservator of Forests

Circle Charges (Controlling)

2. Deputy Conservator of Forests
3. Assistant Conservator of Forests

Divisional charges (Controlling)
Assistant to the Deputy Conserva-

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

4. Range Forest Officers
5. Foresters
6. Forest Guards

tor of Forest or in-charge of the or
independent charge of sub-units
(controlling)
Ranges (Executive)
Section charges (Protective)
Beat charges (Protective)

7. Regarding research charges, they will be held by the following Gasses of
Officers.
1. Conservator of Forest
Conservator of Forest Research
and Utilisation Circle
2. Deputy Conservator of Forests
Silviculturist
3. Assistant Conservator of Forests
Assistant to Silviculturist
4. Range Forest Officers
Research Ranges
5. Forest Research Foresters
6. Forest Guards in-charge of Research Units
8. Arrangement of Forests into beats, sections, ranges, divisions and
Circles.- The arrangement of forests into Circles and Divisions will be
regulated by the Government; that of Forest Divisions into Ranges will be
regulated by the Chief Conservator of Forests (GI.) provided that no addition to the number of ranges shall be made without the sanction of the
Government. The arrangement of ranges into Sections will be regulated by
the Conservator of Forests and .that of Sections into Beats by the
concerned Divisional Forest Officers Provided that no addition to the
number of beats are made without the sanction of the Chief Conservator of
Forests or the Government.
The "Divisional Forest Officer" wherever it occurs in the Code and Manual
will be anyone of the following Officers.
1. District Forest Officer;
2. Divisional Forest Officer;
3. Working Plan Officer;
4. Forest Utilisation Officer;
5. Silviculturist;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

6. Deputy Conservator of Forests (Headquarters);
7. Technical Assistant to the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.);
8. Deputy Director, Project Tiger;
9. Deputy Conservator of Forests, Soil Conservation;
10. Deputy Conservator of Forests, Excise;
11. Divisional Forest Officer, Survey and Demarcation.
9. Personal conduct of Officers.- The Government Servants conduct is
regulated for the State Government Officials and Officers borne on the All
India Services under the appropriate conduct rules.
10: Rents to be charged for Government buildings occupied as
residences.- The rules regulating the provisions of residences for
Government servants are laid down in Articles 41 and 42 of the Karnataka
Financial Code, 1958.
11. Departmental buildings should not be rented to private individuals or
public institutions for occupation even for a temporary period.
12. For other details especially regarding licence fee rules for Government
buildings used as residence, Article 75 of the Karnataka Civil Service
Rules, 1972 and Appendix N of the Karnataka Civil Service Rules, 1972
may be consulted.
13. Rules regulating the occupation of inspection Bungalows and rest
houses in charge of the Forest Department are contained in Appendix I.
14. Hire charges for Government elephants.- Government elephants
when used by Forest Officers on duty "ill be free of any charge. Government elephants when not required for departmental works may be hired to
officials of other Government department or to non-officials at the discretion of the Divisional Forest Officer. When the elephants are hired to the
Government officials on leave, they will be charged as for private parties.
The following rates will be charged for the hiring of Government elephants.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(i) Elephants hired to officials on duty of other Government departments: Rs. 25 per each elephant per day;
(ii) Elephants hired to private parties: Rs. 150 per elephant per day or
part thereof;
(iii) For the purpose of calculating the number of days, hire charges
shall be recovered for the days spent even on marches from and to
the elephant camp including the days spent on rest while marching;
(iv) A rate of Rs. 25 per elephant per day shall be recovered towards
feeding charges irrespective of the size and sex of the elephant in
addition to the hire charges mentioned above;
(v) During the period the elephant leaves the camp till it returns to the
camp, the elephant hired will be at the risk and cost of the hirer. If any
undue happenings takes place such as loss of life and property
during that period, the Forest Department shall not be held
responsible for such 10s5!'!s and no compensation is payable by the
Department to the sufferers of such losses;
(vi) If the elephant is injured or dies during the period, the hirer shall
pay to the Government the book value of the elephant in addition to
the hire charges till the time of death;
(vii) No elephants should be hired outside the State without the
sanction of the State Government. In case the elephants are hired out
for work outside the State, the hire charges would be double the rates
applicable as mentioned above.
(viii) No elephant should be made to work beyond the working hours
i.e., from 8.00 a.m. to 12 noon and 3.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. and the
total working hours shall not exceed 6 hours with a break of 2 hours
in the middle;
(ix) The bata for the Mahouts, Jamedars and Kotwals shall be paid by
the hirer in addition to the other charges by the hirer in addition to the
other Charges.
15. Permission to shoot films inside the Reserved Forests.- The rules
permitting film shooting in the State and the Schedule of rates shall be as
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

prescribed in the G.O. No. HD 31 PIF 72, dated 8th September, 1972
which is reproduced in Appendix II.
16. Hire charges to view Wildlife.- The details of hire charges for vehicles, entrance fee for visitors, photography in filming, elephant rides etc.,
are given in Appendix III
B. Organisation of the Forest Department
Composition of the Forest Staff
17. The Forest staff is composed of.
(a) Indian Forest5ervicei
(b) Karnataka Forest Service.
18. The Indian Forest Service in Karnataka is composed of.
(a) Chief Conservator of Forests (General);
(b) Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.);
(c) Conservators of Forests;
(d) Conservator of Forests "Wildlife Preservation Circle";
(e) Conservator of Forests, Research and Utilisation Circle;
(f) Deputy Conservators of Forests (Senior time scale Officers);
(g) Assistant Conservators of Forests (Junior time scale Officers).
19. The Karnataka Forest Service consists of. (1)Deputy Conservators of Forests;
(2) Assistant Conservators of Forests;
(3) Range Forest Officers I Grade;
(4) Range Forest Officers II Grade;
(5)Foresters
(6) Enumerators (Supervisors);
(7) Veterinary Inspectors;
(8) Elephant Jamedars;
(9) Elephant Mahouts;
(10) Elephant Kawadisi
(11) Forest Watchersi
(12) Game Watchers;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(13) Drivers;
(14) Cleaners;
(15) Gazetted Managers ..
(16) Superintendents I Grade;
(17) Superintendents IT Grade;
(18) I Division Clerks;
(19) II Division Clerks;
(20) Stenographers;
(21) Typists;
(22) Draughtsmen I Grade;
(23) Draughtsmen II Grade;
(24) Laboratory Assistant. Photographer;
(25) Photographer;
(26) Nayak;
(27) Attender;
(28) Daffedars, Attenders;
(29) Peons;
(30) Watchman;
(31) Caretakers of Forest Rest houses;
(32) Sweepers-cum-Scavengers.
20. Classified list of Forest Officers.- The classified list of Gazetted
Officers in the State will be issued by the State Government in their Civil list
published every year as on 1st July of the year. The Chief Conservator of
Forests will also prepare an annual list of I and II .Grade Rangers, I and II
Grade Superintendents, I: Division Clerks and all other equivalent rank officials for the State corrected upto 1st January each year taking care to see
that all abbreviations and symbols denoting the professional training and
other qualifications as well as other necessary particulars are correctly entered therein and will supply copies thereof to Government, Accountant
General, Karnataka Public Service Commission, Conservator of Forests
and Divisional Forest Officers. The Conservator of Forests should prepare
Circle list of Foresters, II Division Clerks, Typists and all other equivalent
rank officials corrected up to 1st January each year and submit them not
later than 15th January every year to the Chief Conservator of Forests (Gl)
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

who will consolidate and print a gerieral list for distribution in the State. The
Divisional Forest Officers and other Officers in-charge of the Division will
prepare a divisional list of Forest Guards and Forest Watchers, Peons etc.,
and all other equivalent rank officials in a similar manner and submit a copy
thereof to the Conservator. of Forests and the Chief Conservator of Forests
by the 15th January every year. The list of Forest Guards shall be printed
and supplied to all the concerned.
21. Recruitment for and appointment to the Forest Services.- The All
India Services Manual, 1969 deals with the rules regulating the method of
recruitment, conditions of service and promotions etc., of the Indian Forest
Service Officers. The recruitment to the members of the Karnataka Forest
Service are given in Cadre and Recruitment Rules of the Forest
Department, 1957, reproduced in Appendix IV. The departmental
recruitment rules are in addition to the Karnataka State Civil Service
(-General Recruitment) Rules, 1959.
The seniority within the various-cadres is governed by the Karnataka
Government Servants' (Seniority).Rules,'1J.957. TI1e probationary period
is governed by the Karnataka Government Servants (Probation) Rules,
1957.
The general service conditions of the members of the Karnataka Forest
Service such as pay and allowances, leave, pension, Foreign Service
Rules, T.A. etc., are governed by the Karnataka Civil Service Rules, 1972.
22. The direct recruitment to Indian Forest Service will be through the
Union P.S.C. and to the gazetted cadre of the Karnataka Forest Service
through the Karnataka State P.S.C: The selection of-candidates for-training
at the Southern Forest Rangers College, Coimbatore will be done by the
Department through a preliminary Selection Committee of the Department.
The recruitment to the Foresters, Typists, Surveyors, Draughtsmen,
Stenographers are done through the Departmental Recruitment
Committee. The Ministerial staff i.e., II Division Clerks, I Division Clerks,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

etc., are done through Karnataka P.S.C. The recruitment to Class IV
Servants, Forest Guards, Watchers, Attenders, Caretakers, etc., will be
done by the Officers empowered to appoint them through the Employment
Exchange.
23. Postings and transfers of the members of the Indian Forest Service and
of the Karnataka State Forest Service in respect of Chief Conservator of
Forests, Conservator of Forests and Deputy Conservator of Forests is
made by the Government.
The postings and transfers of Assistant Conservator of the Karnataka
Forest Service shall be made by the Chief Conservator of Forests (GI).
Postings and transfers of non-gazetted Officers of the Karnataka Forest
Service will be made.
(i) from one circle to another by the Chief Conservator of Forests
(GenL);
(ii) from one division to another within the circle and within the
Division in the case of Rangers by the Conservator of .Forests
concerned and within the Division, except in the case of Rangers by
the Divisional Forest Officers concerned.
24. The disciplinary proceedings in respect of the Indian Forest Service
Officers will be governed by the All India Service (Conduct) Rules, 1968
and All India Service (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1969. The disciplinary
proceedings in respect of the Karnataka Forest Service members will be
governed by 1he Karnataka Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1968 and Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, control and Appeal) Rules, 1957.
25. The Divisional Forest Officers are not allowed to quit their divisions
during authorised holidays or other1imes without permission of 1heir Conservator of Forests concerned with whom the power to grantth.em Casual
leave shall also vest. The Conservator of Forests and other Officers under
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the direct control of the O1ief Conservator of Forests shall obtain the permission of the O1ief Conservator of Forests. The Officers in-charge of the
Division shall exercise similar powers in regard to the Gazetted Assistants.
All Officers of the subordinare Offices including the Ministerial establishment are required to obtain the sanction of the Head of their offices.
C. Examinations
Examinations to be passed by members of the Karnataka Forest
Service
26. Members of the Karnataka Forest Service should pass the following
tests.
Gazetted Officers
Assistant Conservator of Forests
Range Forest Officers I and II
and Range Surveyor.

(1) Accounts Higher
(2) Revenue Lower
(3) Forest Examination
(4) General Law Part I
(1) Accounts Higher
(2) ForestE~ination
(3) Revenue Lower'
(4) General Law Part I

Foresters

(1) Forest Examination
(2) Accounts Lower

Forest Surveyors
Draughtsman
Managers/Superintendents
Accountant Grade II

(1) Forest Examination
(1) Forest Examination
(1) General Law Part I
(1) Accounts Higher
(2) Forest Examination

II Division Clerks

(1) Forest Examination
(2) Accounts Lower

All the above examinations are conducted by the Karnataka State P.S.C.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

The number of days actually required by a Government servant for proceeding to and returning from the Station at which an obligatory departmental examination, which he is permitted to attend is held, will be treated
as a period of duty in addition to the day or days of examination. This
concession shall not be granted more than twice for the same obligatory
examination.
In addition to the above examinations the members of the Karnataka Forest
Service should pass Kannada Language Examination conducted by the
K.P.S.C. in case they have not passed S.S.L.C. with Kannada as Second
language.
For details, the members of the service may refer to the Karnataka Civil
Services (Service and Kannada Language Examinations) Rules, 1974 of
the Government of Karnataka.
CHAPTER II
Management and Working of the Forests
A. GENERAL
27. Register of Reserved Forests.- (a) When the notification under Section 17 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, declaring that a certain area will,
on a fixed date, become a Reserved Forest is published in the Karnataka
Gazette, the boundaries of the Reserved Forest so created, tI1e rights
admitted at settlement and the date on which the notification will come into
force are as detailed therein.
(b) Copies of all notifications under Sections 17 and 28 of Karnataka Forest
Act; 1963 should be preserved for each forest division in a bound Volume
to be called the 'Register of Reserved Forests' and each notification should
be numbered consecutively according to the date on which it takes effect.
Each reserved forest will occupy several pages of the volume, so as to
afford space for additions and or corrections. A sketch map on a suitable
small scale should form part of the record of each Reserved forest.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(c) All subsequent orders sanctioning the changes in the constitution of any
Reserved Forest, as well as, all orders by which rights are modified or
regulated or further rights or concessions are granted within such forest
under Sections 19,22,24,25 and 26 of Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, should
be inserted immediately after their promulgation, in the same volume under
the Reserved forest to which they relate.
(d) The "Register of Reserved Forests" will be maintained in each Range
Forest Office in respect of all reserved forests in the Range. Similarly, in
each Divisional Forest Office, a Register of Reserved forests win be maintained of all Reserved forests in the division. A register of Reserved Forests
for the Circle will be maintained in Conservator's Office. In each Divisional
Forest Office, Working Plans, a Register of Reserved Forests will be maintained of all Reserved forests situated in the Working Plan Division. A
register of Reserved forests in the State will be maintained at the office of
the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans. At the beginning of each official
year, the Divisional Forest Officer will furnish the Conservator of Forests of
the Circle, the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans Circle and the Divisional Forest Officer, Working Plans-with brief particulars concerning all
entries made in his register during the preceding year.
(e) Registers already written up in manuscripts need not be dispensed with,
but the printed copies of gazetted notifications should, as far as possible,
be substituted for the existing manuscript record.
(f) As far as data are available. register similar to that prescribed for
Reserved forests, will be maintain for Protected forests (Section 33(2)(ii)
and Section 35 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963), also.
28. Reserved forest Book.- (a) In the case of forests for which, working
plans have not yet been prepared a separate "Reserved Forest" book will
be maintained for each Reserved forest. This book should be opened by
the Divisional Forest Officer as well as the Range Forest Officer concerned
as soon as the notification under Section 17, Karnataka Forest Act, 1963, is
issued and should contain the Gazetted notification of Government sancCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

tioning the constitution of the Reserved Forest under Section 17. No entry
should be made except under the authority of the Divisional Forest Officer
in each case. The 'Reserved Forest' book should contain the following
information.
(i) A descriptive analysis of the forests;
(ii) Description of final demarcation, with statement of cost and
explanation, if the line laid down deviates in any way from the
sanctioned boundary;
(iii) A record of lines of communication opened and the forest
buildings put up with cost thereof and other information;
(iv) A record of plantations raised, afforestation works done, cultural
operations, as well as works of improvement executed, with results;
(v) A record of forest produce exploited departmentally as well as by
consumers and purchasers;
(vi) Record of protective measures against fire and other causes with
their annual result;
(vii) A record of establishment maintained;
(viii) Annual summary of revenue and expenditure;
(ix) Inspection notes of the Divisional Forest Officer, Conservator and
Chief Conservator;
(x) Any other information bearing upon the working of management of
the Reserved forest.
(b) Several pages must be allotted for each of the above items to record
entries for each year successively for a number of years, so that the 'Reserved Forest book may, in course of time, contain a complete history of
the forest and furnish all the information required for the compilation of a
regular Working Plan.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(c) Similar books must be kept, wherever practicable, for Protected Forests,
District Forests, Private Forests, etc., under the control and management of
the Forest Department.
(d) When once a Working Plan has been prepared and sanctioned, the
Reserve Forest book need no longer be maintained as the Control book
takes its place.
29. Plantation Register.-(a) Whenever plantations are raised, a register
should be opened and maintained by the Range Forest Officer for each
plantation. In this register should be recorded the entire history of the plantation in a chronological order, from the time of its formation, all the operations done therein, till it is harvested. To start with, a brief description of the
existing growth in the area, how it was disposed of, the type of soil, topography, rainfall and extent of the area should be mentioned. An authenticated sketch map of the area indicating the extent of the area of plantation.
the boundary lines and their lengths should invariably be embodied in the
register. Timber, firewood, etc., if any, exploited from the area to be raised
as plantation should be furnished in the register along with the revenue
realised therefrom. The species raised, the technique and espacement
adopted should be noted with full details. The dates of commencement and
completion of the several operations and their cost, such as clearing the
area, up-rooting, burning; pitting, trenching, sowing or planting should be
correctly noted, subsequent operations such as replacements of failures,
weedings, hoeings, scraping round plants, cleanings, thinnings, etc., should
be noted with dates of execution and cost. The yield obtained from thinnings and intermediate fellings as well as from final fellings and the revernue realised there from should also find a place in the register.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the Divisional Forest Officer to see that a
plantation register, is opened immediately a new plantation is formed and is
maintained posted up-to-date by the Range Forest Officer.
(c) All inspections of plantations made by Officers and the observations
made by them at each such inspection should be recorded by such Officers
in the register under the dated initials.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(d) The blank register for the purpose will be the supplied by the Director,
Government Printing, Stationery and Publications and will be property of
Government. On the occasion of transfers of charge these registers should
be specially mentioned in the transfer report.
30. Annual Plan of Operations.- (a) An 'Annual Plan of Operations' must
be drawn up by the Divisional Forest Officer for the working of the forests in
the Division for each financial year before the date fixed for the submission
of the budget estimates. The Range being the unit of administration, the
plan of operations should deal with each range separately. The Plan of
operations shall be prepared in three statements. The first statement shall
show the sanctioned annual plan of operations of last year. The second
statement will show any revision thereof which has subsequently been
found 'necessary and the third the annual plan for the next ensuing year.
The annual plan of operations shall include all works, both under plan and
non-plan, required to be executed in terms of management and working of
the forests and which are to be charged as per the detailed Minor Budget
Heads.
(b) Wherever a Working Plan has been sanctioned for working of any
forest, the annual plan of operations must be based upon the provisions of
the Working Plan. Where no Working Plans exist. and until such plans are
made, the annual plan of operations must be based on the working
schemes, if any, tentatively drawn or on the general principles of Forest
conservancy. It is a matter of the first importance to fix the maximum annual yield, and this limit should not be exceeded without the special sanction of the Conservator of Forests. The quantity of timber to he rut and of
other materials to be taken out of a forest should be regulated so as to
ensure the maintenance of the forest in a state of continuous, or if possible,
increasing productiveness. It should as far as possible, provide for the demands of the Surrounding population, in the matter of supply of timber,
firewood or of pasturage and for the requirements of other Government
Departments, Railways, Defence organisations, industries and of the trade.
It is not, however, necessary that the yield should be uniform during a
series of years, and it may often be found expedient to arrange '£Or an
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

intermittent yield. Guided by these considerations, the annual plan of operations should provide for felling, thinning, exploitation of forest produce,
grazing of cattle protection of forests against fire and other causes and
execution of works of reproduction and improvement. The exercise of all
rights which have been recorded at settlement and of the privileges and
concessions sanctioned by Government from time to time will necessarily
be provided for in these plans.
(c) The Divisional Forest Officer will submit the plan of operation of his
Division to the Conservator of Forests who will, if necessary, modify the
plan and communicate the sanction orders to the Divisional Forest Officer.
The budget of the Forest department will be framed on the basis of the
annual plan of operations.
(d) The responsibility of carrying out the plan of operations will rest entirely
with the Divisional Forest Officer. No deviation from the Plan of operation is
permissible except for such deviations as may be necessitated by
unforeseen events, with the previous approval of the Conservator of
Forests.
31. Register of Annual Yield.- An abstract of the actual yield of the forest
will be recorded in Form No. I annually, separately for each working circles
felling series, of lease unit, as the case may be. A copy of this abstract
shall be entered in the Reserve forest book.
32. Divisional Forest Note-Books.- In each forest division, the Divisional
Forest Officer will keep a permanent notebook in which he will, from time to
time, record all noteworthy occurrences bearing on the management and
improvement of the Forests of his division, and his suggestion for their
future administration; the results of his observations regarding the habits
and wants of important species of trees and further matters which, in his
opinion, it is desirable to record. This notebook will be styled the Divisional
Forest Notebook.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Object of the Notebook
The object of this note-book is to maintain in a permanent form a running
history of forest matters in each division based upon continuous local
observation. In respect of particular forests the note-book should not
contain matter that has already been recorded. in the reserve-book, but
may, if necessary, refer to the said record.
The note-book should be large enough to contain notes for a number of
years; it should be taken into camp (but not as a rule into the Forests
during inspection) so that the entries may be made in it whilst facts are
fresh in the Divisional Forest Officer's mind.
The book is not to be maintained in diary form but as a reference book of
general information in which a newly posted Divisional Forest Officer can
find at once information on various subjects without being compelled to
wade through pages of mixed material.
Entries should be made under various heads and sub-heads to each of
which one or more pages should be assigned. The following are the principal heads required, but the list is not exhaustive and the Divisional Forest
Officer should enter any information of general interest or utility.
(1) List of reserves (by ranges, with areas and dates of final notifications);.
(2) List of roads (length, when constructed, gravelled, metalled, or
unmetalled);
(3) List of buildings (accommodation, cost, date of construction, how
used, furnished or unfurnished, nature of water supply);
(4) List of plantations;
(5) List of 'topes' (Tree groves);
(6) List of sale depots;
(7) Distribution of establishment (by ranges, headquarters and
boundaries of ranges, beats etc.);
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(8) Works required (by ranges, proposals within approximate cost and
relative urgency of each, dates of commencement and completion);
(9) Notes on each reserve separately;
(10) Notes on principal species (a page for each; distribution, growth,
coppice, dates of flowering, seeding, age at maturity, utility as timber,
fuel, charcoal and of minor product - as regards exotics, date of
introduction);
(11) Observations on annual flow of streams as affected by denudation or reafforestation of catchment area (highest flood level, duration
of floods, hot weather flow, etc., with condition of growth. in
catchment area);
(12) Fodder supply-Approximate dates for cutting grass, cost of
cutting, harvesting, baling and transport rates of sale;
(13) Markets and market rates for various kinds of work and produce.
Every entry must be dated and initiated by the officer who makes it.
Notebook to be inspected by the Conservator
The Divisional forest Note-book should always be inspected by the Conservator when visiting the division, and the date of the inspection with such
remarks as the Conservator may wish to place on record, should be duly
entered therein.
Notebooks, the property of Government and to be mentioned in transfer of
charge certificate.
The Divisional Forest Notebook will be supplied by the Director of Stationery and Printing and is the property of Government. (See Section 86).
On the occasion of transfers of charge, it will be handed over with other
records and should be specially mentioned in the transfer report.
33. Maps.- In each division, the following maps will be maintained and one
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

or more copies of each should be mounted in book-form.
(1) A Divisional Forest reference map on the scale of 4 miles to the inch (1
mm = 2,50,000 mm) showing all reserves, roads, forest buildings and
stations, ranges divisions, and other items affecting the administration of
the forest.
(2) A Range Forest reference map, posted as above, but in greater detail,
and showing names of hills and streams minor forest stations, such as
forest guards', permit officers and tannahdars, headquarters, etc.
(3) Separate maps for each reserve, showing topographical features and all
enclosures, rights of way, forest roads and stations compartment and
coupe lines, names of hills, streams, etc. Reserves that adjoining one
another may, if desirable, be shown on one and the same sheet.
(4) Separate working-circle maps on such scale as may be found suitable
in each case.
In the case of Nos. (2) and (3), the scale of the maps, not supplied by the
Survey of India, must vary according to the requirements, the ordinary
scale being 1 and 4 inches to the mile (1 mm = 50,000 mm and 1 mm =
12,500 mm respectively). The rules regulating the procedure in connection
with forest surveys and mapping and their costs are contained in Appendix
V.
It is the duty of the Divisional Forest Officers to see that all alteration of
boundaries, enclosures, all new roads and buildings, etc., are promptly entered in the headquarter maps, from which the camp copies, range and
other maps, must be posted, at least annually (Vide Appendix V).
34. State Forest Atlas.- The State Forest Atlas is compiled from the
divisional forest reference maps referred to in the preceding section and is
kept in the Secretariat and the offices of the Chief Conservator and the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Director, Map Publication, Survey of India, Dehra Dun. Each Conservator
should maintain the Atlas as far as it relates to his own circle.
The Divisional Forest reference maps should be corrected annually upto
31st March, and will be forwarded to the Conservator of the Circle before
the 1st May following; the Atlas in the Conservator's office will then be
correctly posted and the divisional maps will be returned. The Chief Conservator of Forests, Karnataka, is entrusted with the duty of posting the
several copies of the Atlas in use in the headquarter offices mentioned
above. For this purpose, the Conservators should forward the corrected
copies of their atlases to the Chief Conservator before the 1st July of each
year when the necessary corrections will be made in the remaining copies.
35. Working Plans.- A 'Working Plan' is written scheme of management
sanctioned by proper authority, for the systematic treatment of a forest, with
the object of ensuring continuity of policy and action by Officers in-charge
and also to provide against the deterioration and for the in1provement of
the capital (or total growing stock) while working out what represents the
interest (or average annual increase) in an orderly, useful and economic
manner on the principles of sustained yield.
36. The necessity for, and the importance of, a carefully prepared working
plan on a scientific basis for the proper management of a forest property
are unquestionable. In the absence of such a definite scheme of operations
founded on a careful examination and study of the growing stock, the annual increment inputs, there is a serious risk of the forest capital being
either drawn upon unduly by excessive cuttings being made or of the forest
revenue being lost by working the forests below their capabilities.
The area for which a separate Working Plan shall be prepared depends on
the circumstances of the case; but as far as possible a Working Plan
should deal with all- the forests situated in one locality and the entire area
of each forest in that locality. This area may consist of a Forest division, a
range or merely of a beat or group of beats; and it shall be divided into as
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

many Working. Circles as may be necessary, extensive tracts which it may
not be deemed -expedient to work being relegated to a separate working
circle or circles. When a Working Plan deals with more than one working
circle, special prescriptions for the method of treatment to be adopted in
each working circle must be laid down separately in the Working Plan.
37. Working Plan Officer.- A 'Working Plan Officer' is an Officer responsible for drawing up or revising a Working Plan and may be an Officer
specially appointed for the purpose of a local Officer. In drawing up or
revising a Working Plan he will be entirely subordinate to Special Chief
Conservator of Forests (Development).
38. Preliminary Working Plan Report- (1) In order to ensure that correct
plans may be drawn up according to the principles of forest conservancy,
the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans, shall obtain from the Working
Plan Officers a preliminary report and submit it with his remarks to the
Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) as soon as possible, after the
commencement of the operations. This report will be prepared by the
Working Plan Officer after a 'Working Plan Reconnaissance' i.e., a careful
inspection of the forest and after settling the location of working Circle or
circles and it shall contain.(i) a brief description of the forest for which it is proposed to prepare a
plan;
(ii) short notes on past working, management and reproduction with
results;
(iii) the general objects of future management;
(iv) propositions regarding the basis on which it is intended to build
the plan of exploitation and management, (whether on area, material,
or with material with area-check);
(v) proposals with regard to survey of the growing stock, the method
to be adopted for such survey, species of trees to be enumerated and
the percentage of area to be enumerated;
(vi) the constitution of Working Circles;
(vii) the constitution of Felling Series;
(viii) the compartments to be laid;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ix) the method of calculating the yield;
(x) the silvicultural system to be adopted;
(xi) remarks on demand which exist or may be expected; and
(xii) a general outline of his proposals to meet the demand for grazing
and forest produce.
(2) In the case of revision of an existing working plan, the principal objects
of the preliminary report is to examine the results of past working, to decide
how far the prescriptions of the previous Working Plans must be followed
and to what extent and direction and where they require to be modified and
if not, to decide what course the future method of working must take. The
preliminary report should follow the general form and arrangement of a
Working Plan.
(3) For preparing a preliminary working plan report, the Working Plan
Officer will examine the forest carefully, study the results of past working
and will discuss his proposals for future management with the Conservators of Forests and the Divisional Forest Officer having jurisdiction over the
area. He will also consult and have the views of the latter Officers on the
results of past working, the defects of the existing plan, if any, and any
modifications which, in their opinion, require to be considered at the revision. A small scale sketch map showing roughly the proposed, Working
Circles should accompany the report. The Working Plan Officer will submit
the preliminary report to the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans, forwarding simultaneously a copy of it to the Conservator of Forests of the
Circle and the Divisional Forest Officer of the Division concerned for remarks. On receipt of the remarks and Views of the latter Officers, the Working Plan Officer will submit their remarks and Views with his opinion
thereon to. the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans. The Conservator. of
Forests, Working Plans will scrutinize the preliminary plan carefully, taking
into consideration the remarks of the Territorial Officers and the opinion of
the Working Plan Officer and pass it on to the Special Chief Conservator of
Forests (Dev.) with his remarks if any, for approval. He will also guide the
Working Plan Officer at all stages in drawing up of the Plan. The Special
Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) will, if necessary, discuss any or all of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the propositions made in the preliminary report with the Conservator of
Forests. Working Plans and the local Officers having jurisdiction over the
forest and approve the preliminary report with such modifications, if any,
that he may consider necessary in his opinion. The Special Chief
Conservator of Forests (Dev.) may, at any time during the preparation of
the plan, consult the Inspector General of forests on any technical point.
The Conservator of Forests, Working Plan may, if necessary. consult the
Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) on all important technical and
other matters connected with the elaboration of the Working Plan. The
Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) may issue, in the form of
circular or otherwise, directions regarding the technical part of the
preparation of Working Plans.
39. Definitions of Technical Terms.- The technical terms and definitions
used in the Working Plans will follow the Indian Forest Records, 'A
Glossary of technical terms for use in Indian Forestry'. Details are given in
Appendix XVII.
40. Printing of Botanical and local names of species.-Botanical names
should invariably follow the local names wherever they occur in the body of
the plan and similarly the English equivalents when local terms are used.
The botanical names should also be given a glossary at the end of the
plan.
41. The working plan shall, as far as possible or necessary, be drawn up on
the following lines:
INTRODUCTION
PART I
Summary of facts on which the proposals are based
CHAPTER I
The tract dealt with
Section.:CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Section 1.- Name and situation; geographical limits and boundaries;
administration units included.
Section 2.- Physical geography and configuration of the ground.
Section 3.- Geology, rock and soil.
Section 4.- Climate.
Section 5.- Water supply.
Section 6.- Distribution and area; details of areas under reserved forests,
protected forests and district forests.
Section 7.- Survey Position.
Section 8.- Working Plan position.
Section 9.- State of boundaries.
Section 10.-- Legal position.
Section 11.- Rights. privileges and concessions.
Section 12.- Commitments such as areas leased out and periods of leases.
CHAPTER II
The Forest
Section.
1. Composition and condition of the crop; forest types and their distribution,
flora and fauna of the area, state of natural regeneration. etc.
2. Injuries to which the crop is liable.
CHAPTER III
Utilisation of the produce
Section. Section 1.- Agricultural customs and wants of the population.
Section 2.- Other sources of demand such as Industries, Railways,
Defence forces, Trade, etc.
Section 3.~ Marketable produce.
Section 4.- Markets and lines of export.
Section 5.- Methods of exploitation and cost.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Section 6.- Past and current prices.
CHAPTER IV
Establishment and Labour Section
1.- Existing establishment. Section
2.- Position of labour supply; local or imported, labour rates etc.
CHAPTER V
Past systems of management
Section 1.- General history of the forest including institution and progress
of organised forest management.
Section 2.- Past system of management and their results.
Section 3.- Special works of improvement undertaken such as silvicultural
improvement, protective measures, communications and buildings,
utilisation of forest products, etc.
Section 4.- Past yield.
Section 5.- Past Revenue and Expenditure.
CHAPTER VI
Statistics of stocking, growth, volume and yield
Section 1.- Estimate of stocking of principal species, percentage of
enumeration, girth and diameter classes used, allotment to quality classes,
etc.
Section 2.- Statistics of growth; increments in height, girth or diameter and
volume, results of stem and stump analysis, mean annual increment and
current annual increment, etc.
Section 3.- Volume and yield; outtum of timber and firewood per hectare,
yield tables, etc.
CHAPTER VII - Estimate of Capital value of the forest
CHAPTER VIII - Watershed management and soil conservation
CHAPTER IX - Wildlife and Game management
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

CHAPTER X - Social Forestry
PART II
Future management discussed and prescribed
CHAPTER I
Basis of proposals
Section 1.- General objects of management and brief statement of
treatment required to secure them as regards.
(a) the attainment of the normal forest and the establishment of
normal regeneration;
(b) the silvicultural requirements of the species dealt with;
(c) the regular supply of the requirements of the local population for
timber, firewood, bamboos, minor forest products and pasturage;
(d) supply of special requirements of timber and other forest produce
for Industries, trade, Railways, Defence departments, etc.; the yield of
timber and other forest produce; for industries, trade, Railways,
Defence departments, etc;
(e) the yield of timber and other forest produce;
(f) the improvement and regulation of water supply;
(g) watershed management and soil conservation;
(h) Wildlife and Game management;
(i) the improvement of the capital value of the forest for the enhancement of future yield;
(j) Social forestry objectives.
Section 2.- Method of treatment to be adopted.
Section 3.- Formation of Working Circles, their area and distribution,
reasons for their constitution.
Section 4.- Period of Working P1an and necessity for intermediate
revision.
CHAPTER II
Working Plan for Working Circle

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Section 1.- General constitution of the Circle and character of the
vegetation.
Section 2.- Blocks and compartments.
Section 3.- Formation of Felling series (area and allotment).
Section 4.- The stock; the analysis and valuation of the crop (stock maps,
registration status, quality and age classes, density, enumeration and their
results).
Section 5.- Method of treatment; the silvicultural system.
Section 6.- Calculation of rotation and conversion period.
Section 7.- Exploitable size.
Section 8.- Reducing factors and reduced areas.
Section 9.- Felling Cycle.
Section 10.- Division of the area into periods, if any, and allotment to
periodic Blocks.
Section 11.- Calculation of the yield.
Section 12.- Tabular statement of fellings.
Section 13.- Method of executing the fellings.
Section 14.- Agency of exploitation.
Section 15.- Subsidiary silvicultural operations (cleanings, thinnings, and
supplementary fellings and tending).
Section 16.- Artificial regeneration: (treatment of existing plantations; new
plantings and sowings; choice of species and their nursery and plantation
technique; spacing; fencing; tending of young crop).
Section 17.- Other regulations: (grazing based on carrying capacity;
protection against fire and other causes; exercise or rights and privileges
and how they are to be met with).
Chapter III to Chapter……..
Chapter for all other Working Circles
Chapter……………………………………………………General
Improvement
Section 1.- Miscellaneous regulations (prescribed and suggested) for
improvement fellings, cleaning, thinnings, protection against fire and other
causes, etc.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Section 2.- lmprovements of lines of conut1unication such as roads paths,
bridges, tram-ways, waterways, etc.
Section 3.- improvements in the methods of exploitation.
Section 4.- Buildings, wells and water supply.
Section 5.- Possible development of Forest industries.
Section 6.- Maintenance of boundaries.
Section 7.- Proposals for further reservation, if any.
Section 8.- Surveys and maintenance of maps.
Section 9.- Preservation plots, sample plots and protected trees.
Section l0.-.Experiments and research.
Section 11.- Watershed management and soil conservation.
Section 12.- Wildlife management.
Chapter……………………………….Control and Records
Section 1.- System of Control.
Section 2.- Control forms.
Section 3.- Collection and record of statistics.
Section 4.- Fire records and fire maps.
Section 5.- Climatic records.
Section 6.- Game records.
Section 7.- Plantations Journals and Forest Journals.
Chapter. . . . . . . . Establishment and labour
Section 1.- Establishment.
A statement of the existing establishment will have been given in Part I of
the plan. In this Chapter, its adequacy or otherwise may be commented
upon having regard to the works prescribed in the plans. As the Government's sanction of the plan conveys no administrative sanction to
expenditure on any kind, any changes in the establishment require
separate proposals .and justifications. The matter should be carefully
discussed with the local Divisional Forest Officer and considered in
consultation with him.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Section 2.- Labour.
Proposals for improvement or organisation of labour supply may be given
here.
Chapter. . . . . . . . Financial Forecast and cost of plan
Section 2.- Expenditure.
A careful estimate of probable future revenue and expenditure should be
prepared. The revenue may be based partly on past actuals and partly on
an estimate of yield. The expenditure may be divided into 1) expenditure
(Ordinary) for the maintenance and upkeep of forest and 2) expenditure
(capital) representing the outlay on capital works for the development as far
as can be iinmediate1y estimated. The total anticipated, revenue should be
compared with the estimated expenditure, and the estimated excess calculated as well as percentage of expenditure to gross revenue.
Chapter……..Summary of Prescriptions
A brief resume of prescriptions fur each working circle may be given in this
chapter.
Appendices of the Plan
Only those appendices required for the elucidation of the plan should be
printed with it. These must be kept to a minimum. The following among
other things will form some of the important appendices to the plan:
(i) Area statement;
(ii) Compartment histories;
(iii) Enumeration results;
(iv) Details of statistics of growth and yield;
(v) List of Plantations;
(vi) List of flora of the area with their Botanical and local names;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(vii) List of common wild animals and birds found in the Working Plan area;
(viii) A statement of Sample plots, Increment plots, Preservation plots,
Protected trees, etc., in the Working Plan area;
(ix) Amendments to the plan, correction slips, etc.
42. The year for which operations are prescribed unless otherwise directed,
be the financial year.
43. (1) The amount of detailed requisite in the compilation of Working Plans
will depend upon the demands which are made on the forests, the nature
and value of the produce removed from them and the other purposes which
they are to fulfil. The schedule of headings prescribed above for preparing
a Working Plan is intended as an instruction for the preparation of
important Working Plans. For less important plans and for temporary
working schemes, only a selection from these headings is required.
(2) Where the demand exceeds or even equals the possible outturn
Working Plans must be prepared with great minuteness and everything
must be arranged so as to obtain the highest outturn which the forest is
capable of returning under the most careful .management. Where, on the
other hand, the demand is as yet below the ordinary capability of the forest,
a more simple and expeditious procedure may be followed.
(3) With a view to bringing all important forests, for whose produce demand
exists or is likely to arise in near future, as soon as possible, under
systematic management, a working scheme of a simple description and
based on such data as may be readily obtainable may be prepared to be
succeeded by more accurate plans as the detailed information required for
their preparation becomes available.
(4) The Officer who prepares a Working plan will be held responsible for
the accuracy of the statistical information it contains; provided that in cases
where the conditions are such that the collection and record of such inforCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

mation can safely be entrusted to his subordinates, the names of such subordinates shall be mentioned in the Working Plan report. The Working Plan
Officer must, under any circumstances make a personal inspection of all
portions of the area dealt with, which it is proposed to exploit under the
provisions of. the Plan and satisfy himself that all information, however
collected, in respect of such portions is accurate.
(5) It is desirable that a careful examination and report should be made of
the present and the possible influence of the forest tract upon the climate
and water supply of the country; that the objects sought to be attained in
the management of the area should be fully specified and that the
treatment prescribed should be in accordance therewith. It is also of
importance that the collection of data and upkeep of records should be
continuous and accurate. With this object, suitable localities for the
measurement of spring levels and of rainfall should be specified and the
erection of permanent bench marks from whence bearings can be taken in
order to record alterations in width of water-ways and variations of high and
low water levels should be prescribed. The Working Plan Officer will during
his inspection of the area, compile a list of water courses originating in or
flowing through the forest giving a short description of each and noting
whether the water supply is perennial and its approximate volume at the
time of his visit.
44. (1) When a Working Plan has been drawn up, the Working Plan Officer
shall send a typed copy of the Working Plan to the Conservator of Forests,
Working Plans, accompanied by a short explanatory note stressing any
points of importance, especially to any deviations, however slight, from the
preliminary. Working Plan report or subsequent instructions. Simultaneously, he will send a copy of the Working Plan to the Conservator of
Forests views of the Circle, the Divisional Forest Officer of the Division
concerned, and Deputy Commissioner of district concerned for remarks.
On receipt of the views of the officers mentioned above, the Working Plan
Officer will forward their views with his opinion thereon to the Conservator
of Forests, Working Plans who will carefully scrutinise the Plan and its
technical details, make corrections wherever necessary to bring up the plan
scientifically correct and forward it to the Special Chief Conservator of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Forests (Dev.) for approval, after countersigning it.
(2) The Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) will, after examination
and necessary corrections, or consultation with Chief Conservator of
Forests (GL) return it with his approval to the Conservator of Forests,
Working Plans.
(3) On the approval of the Plan by the Special Chief Conservator of
Forests, (Dev.) four final copies are typed. The Working Plan Officer must
check these copies himself and certify to that effect. The Working Plan
Officer will send three copies of the approved plan after correction to the
Conservator of Forests, Working Plan, who will retain a copy in his office
and forward two copies to the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.).
The fourth copy will be kept in the Working Plan Office for record. "The
Special Chief. Conservator of Forests will retain one copy in his office and
submit the other copy to Government with his final recommendation for
sanction. After it is sanctioned by the Government, this copy is returned to
the Special Chief Conservator of Forests-(Dev.) with the necessary
sanction for getting requisite number of copies printed.
(4) A printed copy of the sanctioned Working Plan will, in all cases, be
forwarded to the lnspector-General of Forests and the President, Forest
Research Institute and Colleges, Dehradun for information and record.
(5) Working Plan reports may be supplied by the Special Chief Conservator
of Forests, (Dev.) to heads of Forest Departments of other States on a
reciprocal basis. If the Department of the other Government is not
agreeable for exchange, he may supply on payment of cost fixed.
45. (a) When a Working Plan has received the sanction of Government, no
deviation shall take place from its prescriptions with the following exceptions and under the following authority.
(i) Slight deviations, not amounting to an alteration of the general
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

schemes of management, in deficit of prescribed working either of
material or area, may be sanctioned by the Conservator of Forests
who will subsequently report the matter to the Special Chief
Conservator of Forests (Dev.). Considerable or continuous deviations
in deficit require the sanction of the Special Chief Conservator of
Forests (Dev.);
(ii) Working in excess of the prescribed amount may be sanctioned by
the Conservator of Forests when such excess, either of material or
area, it caused by the accumulation of balances due to deficit working
in previous years. In any other case of excess working, the sanction
of the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) is necessary;
(iii) For changes in the character or principles of working, the sanction
of the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) should be
obtained; but the Conservator may act in anticipation of such sanction
in the case of fire or any sudden accident or in Case of exceptional
seed years or as in case of gregarious flowering and death of
bamboos, necessitating a sudden change of the plan.
(b) All proposals involving deviation, which require the sanction of the
Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev,) shall be submitted through the
Conservator of Forests;
(c) All deviations sanctioned either by the Special Chief Conservator of
Forests (Dev.) or the Conservator of Forests should be intimated to the
Conservator of Forests, Working Plans and the concerned Working Plan
Officer;
(d) Copies of orders sanctioning deviations must be recorded with the
Working Plan and referred to in the remarks column of each Control form
and in the Register of deviations.
46: (a) The Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) may sanction
inclusion in, and exclusion from, sanctioned Working Plans, of forest areas
notified under Sections 17 and 28 of the Karnataka Forest Act, 1963
respectively.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(b) At the beginning of each year, the Conservator of Forests of each Circle
shall, in consultation with the Conservator of Forests Working Plan and the
concerned Working Plan Officer, decide the changes to be made in the
sanctioned Working Plan areas on account of reservations and disreservations ordered during the previous year and submit proposals
through the Chief Conservator of Forests (GL) to Special Chief Conservator
of Forests (Dev.) for sanction.
(c) The printing and posting of correction slips dealing with changes in the
main prescription of the plan is essential.
47. The revision of a Working Plan requires the same formalities as the
original preparation of a Working Plan.
"48. It is most desirable that, as far as possible, the coupes should be
worked in regular rotation, otherwise the regularity and orderliness of the
rotation system is lost and it is deprived of its main advantage. When areas
that should have been cut in previous years are being left standing.. the
forecast of the area to be cut, the quantity of timber to be put in the market,
and the position of the departmental budget provided for are upset. Hence,
where a coupe has not been fel1ed in its proper year, every effort should
be made to dispose it off at least in the following year.
49. The normal period for closure for all areas under regeneration including
plantations shall not exceed 5 years. In cases where the progress of
regeneration has been such as to make this necessary, the Conservator of
Forests may, by special order, increase this period up to 10 years. All areas
not dosed for the purposes mentioned above shall be open to grazing.
50. The Divisional Forest Officer, Working Plans in each circle should
maintain a register in Form 2 of all sanctioned plans of the Circle and keep
it corrected up-to-date. In April each year, he should supply to the Special
Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.), Conservator of Forests and the territoCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

rial Divisional Forest Officers concerned extracts from the registers corrected upto 31st March.
51. For the control of working of all forests under Working Plans, the
following Control records will be prepared and maintained by the Divisional
Forest Officers:
(i) Control book
(ii) Record of works
(iii) Control journal
(iv) Control maps
(v) Register of deviations from the Working Plan
(vi) Register of statement of sanctioned Working Plans (in Form 2).
1. Control Books.-This record shall, ordinarily, be maintained separately
for each Working circle for the years for which operations are prescribed in
the Working Plan and shall be written up annually as prescribed in Forms 3
and 4. They show the prescriptions and suggestions of a sanctioned
Working Plan and the fellings and other exploitation actually made or the
works actually carried out against them. The objects of the control books
are.
(i) to compare the actual fellings or other exploitation of the year with
the prescriptions of the Working Plan and to enable the controlling
authority to see how far the provisions of a sanctioned plan as
regards fellings and exploitation have been carried out and where
they have been departed from;
(ii) to record the yield of timber and other produce and the revenue
deprived therefrom;
(iii) in the event of the area or quantity of material exploited in any
year being less than that prescribed in the Working Plan, provide for
the bringing forward year by year of the balance still available for
exploitation, until it is exploited or written off under competent
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

authority;
(iv) in the event of any exploitation in excess, whether of material, or
area, of the prescriptions of the plan, to provide that such excess
shall, unless orders to the contrary are issued by competent authority,
be deducted from the quantity prescribed for exploitation in future
years; and
(v) to enable the Divisional Forest Officer to ascertain at the beginning of each year what arrear fellings or other matters have to be
adjusted-in the current year.
Note.-When the prescription of the Working Plan is by sub-periods and not
by years, these instructions should be applied accordingly.
(vi) The entries in Control Forms 3 and 4 will be made under the
following main heads.
(i) Prescribed by the Working Plan;
(ii) Suggested by the Working Plan;
(iii) Neither suggested nor prescribed, but actually carried out;
(iv) The actual method of entry will vary with the method of
control. However, the general pattern of entries will be as
follows.
All deviations, plus or minus, carried forward from the previous year or
years will first be entered in red ink. The prescription of year to which the
control form pertains will then be entered in black ink. Next, the results of
working will be entered in the appropriate columns, showing the year of
working, area, the kind and number of trees by species, their gross volume
removed from each coupe. The plus or minus deviation columns will be
entered in red ink Showing the differences in volume, area, and number of
trees, between the totals of control columns on the one hand and result
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

columns on the other. In the remarks columns deviations will tie explained.
Against trees removed or the material exploited, the agency of removal
such as, by Government agency, removal by purchasers arid consumers,
removal by right and privilege holders, etc., may be indicated.
2. Record of Works.- This is a brief record to be written up annually in
Form 5 for each Working Circle of all works carried out in connection with
the construction and repairs of communications and buildings, wells and
tanks, etc.. and in connection with demarcation, sowing and planting, cultural operations, protection from fire and other causes, climber cutting, improvement felling, thinnings, cleanings and other tending operations when
they are distinct from the main exploitation operations prescribed in the
Working Plan. To provide for record of operatic)ns not definitely prescribed
in the Working Plan, the Record of works should, when necessary, be divided in the following manner and kept up accordingly.
(i) Prescriptions of the Working Plan;
(ii) Measures suggested in the Working Plan;
(iii) Measures neither prescribed nor suggested in the Working Plan; but
carried out during the year.
3. Control Journal (Forest Journal).- This is a register in which are
recorded all noteworthy occurrences, bearing on the management and
improvement of the forests, more particularly on the state of reproduction of
the more valuable species and on the suitability or otherwise of the system
of management prescribed in the Working Plan. The main object of the
journal is to record observations on the spot and information not obtainable
in the prescribed forms. The information should be limited to observations
made in the field and should be signed and dated. The unit of area for
which forest journals should be maintained, should be laid down in the
Working Plan. As it is of 8!eat importance to ensure continuity, the unit of
area once fixed should not be changed without the fullest consideration. A
summary of annual revenue and expenditure in such a form as will facilitate
comparison with the financial forecast in the Working Plan must be include
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

d. The journal should be written up by the Divisional Forest Officer himself
or by one of his Gazetted Assistants. The information should be recorded
under the following headings subject to such alterations as may be
considered necessary by the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.).
Sufficient number of pages should be allotted to each headings. A list of
headings should be pasted in the first page of the journal and the numbers
of the pages on which each heading will be 10und should be entered
opposite to it.
A. Growing Stock
(i) General;
(ii) Natural reproduction;
(iii) Bamboo flowering;
(iv) Seed years of important species;
(v) Seasons of flowering, ripening of seed. leaf, fall and new leaf;
(vi) Species, whether, or not, killed by girdling;
(vii) Coppicing capacity of important species.
B. Factors influencing the crop
(i) Biotic factors
(ii) Fire protection
(iii) Climate
(iv) Injuries plants, such as Launtana, Euphatorium odoratum, strobilanthus, Loranthus and any other species which may become dangerous;
(v) Other causes of injury
C. Results of work done
(i) Marking for regeneration fellings and the results of the operations;
(ii) Marking for felling other than regeneration (these will include fellings
made for the improvement of the forest as well as those for yield purposes);
(iii) Climber cutting;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(iv) Felling of Ficus-bound trees; Stream improvement;
(v) Notes on extraction;
(vii) Brief references to roads, bridges, paths, buildings, camping grounds,
wells, tanks and fences.
4. Control Maps.- A map showing the result of fire protection .will be
prepared and maintained in such manner as the Special Chief Conservator
of Forests (Dev.) directs. In addition, maps on the four inch to a mile scale
or its equivalent in Metric system showing the progress of fellings, artificial
and natural reproduction and silvicultural operations will be maintained
when considered desirable, if not already prescribed in the Working Plan.
A. Register of deviations from the Working Plan
52. In this register will be recorded all durations from the prescriptions of a
Working Plan in a serial order showing the nature of the prescription, the
nature of deviation and the authority sanctioning such deviation.
53. The control and the check on the carrying out the prescriptions of
Working Plans rests with the Conservators of Forests. The Divisional
Forest Officers will prepare the annual control records namely Control
books, record of works, and post up Control journal and Register of
deviations and submit abstracts of Control books and record of works and
copies of entries made in the Control journal and the Register of deviations
in duplicate to the Conservator of Forests in respect of the previous year,
not later than the 15th August in each year. Theywill also forward the
copies of the same to the Working Plan Officers concerned for scrutiny and
record. The duty of checking the control records in the Divisional Forest
Offices rests with the Conservators of Forests primarily.
B. Exploitation of timber and Other Produce
54. (1) The method of exploitation and .disposal of timber, sandalwood and
other forest produce will vary according to the special circumstances of
each locality, but it may generally be stated that all forest produce is either
departmentally collected, stored and sold from sale depots or the removal
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

and disposal is effected through private agency. In the latter case, the exploitations may be carried out either under what is known as the 'Lease
system' or under the 'License or Permit system'. Timber being a valuable
commodity, it should be exploired, as far as possible, departmentally. Sandalwood and Rosewood shall always be exploired departmentally and by
no other means.
(2) Firewood, bamboos and other minor forest produce may be exploited
and disposed ofthrougb private agency, provided fair prices are secured. In
all other cases, departmental exploitation should be resorted to when fair
prices cannot be obtained at sale or where special products, not hitherto in
demand in the market are to be exploited.
55. Exploitation of Timber by Government Agency.- Under this system,
the Department has not only to fell all the trees marked for felling, but also
subject them to a certain amount of conversion, and collect them in forest
depots from which their subsequent transport by land or water can be
effected to the sale depot.
56. Whether the exploitation is for timber or fuel or both, certain preliminary
works such as, laying out of coupes, enumeration, marking for felling or
reservation, formation of new roads or cart tracks, and construction of
bridges or culverts, if any, required for the transport have to be done in
advance. The sanctioned Working Plan, Working Scheme or the
sanctioned annual plan of, operations will indicate the locality and extent of
forest to be worked each year and the method of treatment to be adopted.
Before the end of September each year, the Range Forest Officer should
prepare and submit- to the Divisional Forest Officer a proper plan of all
operations to be carried out in the area to be worked in the following year
commencing from the 1st April. Separate estimates based on the
sanctioned schedule of rates should be prepared for each coupe, providing
for demarcation of the coupe, and sub-dividing the coupe. into sub-coupes.
The sub-coupes should be three in number, The first .sub-coupe should be
farthest. While working, the work should commence from the first coupe.
Until the felling of trees and conversion into logs, etc., are over in the subCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

coupe area, under any circum stance the work in the second sub-coupe not
be allowed. When the felling and conversion of the sub-coupe is over or is
in progress then transportation should be taken. The work of felling and
conversion should progress in all the sub-coupes accordingly.
57. On receipt of sanction to the annual Plan of operations referred to in the
above paragraph or the orders of the Divisional Forest Officer in the matter,
the Range Forest Officer by himself or with the assistance of the Surveyor,
if any, attached to the Division shall survey the area of the coupe and lay it
out on the ground. He shall make a plan of the coupe marking the bearings
and the lengths of each boundary line. The coupe thus marked and laid out
on the ground shall be demarcated by him by a cleared line of sufficient
width as prescribed in !:be Working Plan or Scheme or Plan of operation or
as ordered by the Divisional Forest Officer. In addition or in lieu of the
cleared line, he may be required to provide comer stones or posts and to
provide bands in red paint on trees on the boundary of the coupe.
All the comers of the coupe should be distinctly and clearly marked.
58. The marking, for felling or reservation should be in accordance with the
prescriptions of the Working Plan or the sanctioned working scheme or ,
any executive order issued by the Divisional Forest Officer:
Enumeration and marking trees and estimation of yield
Total enumeration and marking of trees, and listing along with proper
estimation should be done by the Section Forester or Special Duty Ranger
and checked by the Range Forest Officer. AU the trees to be felled and
converted into timber should be given stencil number at the bottom and at
135 cms. above the ground level and given tar band at 135 cms. height
above the ground level. The list of such trees should be prepared in triplicate and checked by the Range Forest Officer in-charge of the Range and
then submitted to the Divisional Forest Officer. All trees to be felled or
converted should be numbered serially in tar or suitable paint after blazing
the bark and the girth at breast height, the approximate length of the
utilisable portion of the stem and branches of each tree, together with the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

name of the species being recorded in a register called the 'Marking and
Felling Register' as prescribed in the FAC. The tree marked for felling or
conversion should be stamped with the prescribed felling hammer mark at
its base and marked with a ring of tar or paint band. The condition of each
tree whether dead or dying, sound or unsound, standing or fallen should
also be recorded in the register. The approximate cubical contents of each
tree, for the purpose of estimating the yield, should then be calculated by
the Quarter-girth formula (G/4)2 X L and entered in the Register. An
estimate of the portion of the tree that may not be fit for being converted
into timber, but constituting lops and tops and utilisable as firewood should
also be made and entered in the register in terms of tonnes. The estimated
yield of timber and firewood, thus arrived at, constitutes the gross yield of
the coupe, i.e., the total quantity of forest produce to. be felled or cut,
whether to be removed and utilised or not. The results of subsequent
operations such as felling and conversion should also appear in the same
register, under the heading net yield or outturn i.e., such portion of the
gross yield as has been I actually available for utilisation and taking into
stock. The entire operation of marking for felling should be completed
before the end of January each year.
59. The Range Forest Officer shall submit proposals with the requisite
particulars to the Divisional Forest Officer before the end of February for
felling, conversion and transport of timber either directly to the sale depots
or to the intermediate forest depots and their lotting in the sale depots to be
carried out in the following year based on the prevailing rates to enable the
Divisional Forest Officer to invite tenders for such 'works. The proposal
should be accompanied with a copy of the marking and felling register
together with a classified abstract of trees marked for felling. The proposal
should also provide for the utilisation of lops and tops if found economical.
Particulars in respect of the name and situation of the coupe, the number of
trees to be felled or the area to be felled the approximate quantity of timber
or other produce to be collected or converted from such felled trees and the
specifications of the converted materials, the Depot to which it is required
to transport such material, the lead from the coupe to the Depot and the
availability or otherwise of the facilities to spare the Departmental elephants
for dragging timber to the road and extraction paths should be detailed in
the proposal. On receipt of such a proposal from the Range Forest Officer,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the Divisional Forest Officer should take action to invite tenders for getting
these works executed and settle the contracts well in time before the end of
April each year so that the felling and conversion operations may be
commenced at the early part of the year for which they are prescribed and
the transport operations commenced by 1st November, so as to fully avail
of the dry season to clear the stock of timber from the coupe. All contracts
should adequately provide for progress to be achieved from time to time
and for the observance of the rules for the transport of timber and other
forest produce as are in force and such other rules, regulations and orders
of the department as may be in force or issued from time to time.
60. (a) All proposals for felling, conversion and transport of timber from
forests should provide not only or the current year's coupes, but also for the
unexploited portions of the previous year's coupes. Immediately on the
close of the official year, an abstract of the Marking and Felling and register
shall be prepared for each coupe in the following form.
(1) Kind of tree (2) Number of trees marked for felling (3) Number of
trees actually felled (4) Number of logs prepared with their cubical
contents (5) Number of logs supplied to Depot or disposed of with
their cubical contents (6) Number of trees stilI remaining to be felled
(7) Number of logs with their cubical contents still remaining in the
coupe and (8) Remarks.
(b) In the following year, the entries in Columns 6 and 7 mentioned above
must be brought forward as balance available for felling and disposal. This
abstract will greatly facilitate the preparation of control form and periodical
stocktaking of Jungle stock.
61. (1) Fellings should be proceeded in regular order, as far as possible.
No tree that has not been marked for felling should be felled. Trees should
be felled as low as possible preferably flush with the ground. Felling of
trees shall be done only by sawns to prevent wastage and no axe shall be
permitted. The stools of felled trees should be trimmed and dressed to a
conical shape or to a sloped surface whenever such a thing is required in
any particular coupe or species. The direction of felling should be carefully
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

manipulated to see that least damage is caused to other standing growth,
and natural regeneration in the surrounding area as well as to the felled
tree itself. Immediately on felling a. tree, branches which may fall upon or
may encumber any stool, seedling or sapling should be cleared and such
stools, seedlings and saplings freed of branches and other felled or fallen
inflammable material. As each tree is felled, the original number on the tree
should be written on the stump so that the resulting logs may be correctly
numbered after conversion.
(2) The method of conversion should aim at placing in the market the wood
in the form in which it is generally required in the markets of each locality
and at utilising the felled trees to the maximum extent with least wastage.
The utilizable portion of stem and branches of each tree should be logged
into as many straight lengths as possible according to the specifications to
be issued by the Range Forest Officer under the orders of the Divisional
Forest Officer. The logging shall be done with the saw only. The
specifications of logs, pieces and poles may, among other things, prescribe
the common lengths for different species and girth classes and also specify
whether the" may be in round with bark or without bark, or round-dressed.
No square dressing of logs should be permitted. The ends of all logs,
pieces and poles should be cut straight and dressed to a smooth surface.
In case of logs with bark on, a narrow strip of bark at the centre of the log
should be removed alround and the surface smoothened of all
excrescences, knots, etc., to facilitate taking centre girth measurements
accurately. All knots and cut ends of branches on the surface of the log
should be trimmed level to the log surface. The logs, etc., so prepared
should be kept clear of all debris. The material from lops and tops may, if
required by the Divisional Forest Officer, be billetted and stacked. As far as
possible, preparation of timber should be completed before the close of
September so that their transport may be commenced at the beginning of
the dry season.
(3) Unsound and hollow logs of inferior kinds should not be allowed to be
prepared. In case of superior kinds, unsound and hollow logs may be
collected provided they can fetch the cost of collection and transport at the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

depot sales.
(4) To supervise the working of the area, a separate Forester or a trained
Guard should be appointed by the Conservator of Forests when the coupe
is taken up for working.
(i) Before starting the work, the contractor or agency of working
should first clear the .boundary of the coupe to the extent of 10
meters. The contractor should appoint an agent at his own cost to
supervise the Kamagari work and to assist the Kamagari Forester /
Guard in measurement of logs etc.;
(ii) Logging shall be done with the saw only. The specifications
working should be sub-coupe wise; viz., working in Sub-coupe II will
not be allowed until working of felling and conversion of sub-coupel is
completed. Then the transport work should start. The work should
proceed likewise in other sub-coupes. Axes should not be used for
felling, otherwise the contractor should, be penalised heavily;
(iii) Soon after the tree is felled, the Kamagari Forester should give
cross-cut marks for logs, pieces, poles, posts and Kalagas and
entered in cross-cut register meant for that. Kalagas of teak should
only be allowed to be prepared. After the trees are 'Converted, the
prepared material should be taken to account in the jungle register.
Each log prepared should bear the compartment or coupe number,
year of felling, tree number and serial number of logs and quality
class of timber. This should be chiselled or given stencil numbers. As
and when the timber is despatched the transit pass number and date
should be entered against the relevant material in this register. When
the material is received in the depot, the Departmental staff should
check the material and send an acknowledgement to the Kamagari
Official concerned. All pieces of reserve kind should be transported to
the concerned Government Saw Mill for conversion;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(iv) The contractor is responsible for the safety of the material during
the currency of the contract and even when the working is temporarily
suspended by competent authority. The Contractor should fire trace
the boundary before the fire season starts (before the end of January)
and it is his responsibility to see that there is no incidence of fire in
the contract areas and he should appoint fire watchers at his own
cost. When logging is done departmentally, the Officer concerned
should take fire protection measures as indicated;
(v) The logging work should be frequently inspected by the Ranger
and periodically by the Assistant Conservator of Forests and
Divisional Forest Officers. The Conservators of Forests are also
requested to inspect the areas during their visit to the Division;
(vi) The Forest Utilisation Officer will inspect the logging areas to
ensure that instructions are followed and bring slackness, if any, to
the-notice of concerned Conservators of Forests and Chief
Conservator of Forests.
(5) The numbering of the converted material should ensure that every
utilisable part of the tree whose extraction is economical is satisfactorily
accounted for. For this purpose, the original number placed on each, tree
as well as the jungle serial number of log, piece or pole of the coupe is
given. Thus for example, if tree number 24 yields 3 logs or pieces and the
last jungle serial number is 80; the three logs or pieces will be numbered,
81/24, 82/24 and 83/24, the numerator indicating the jungle serial number
of the log or piece and the denominator the serial number of the tree
marked in the coupe should also be indicated on the log or piece by
appropriate symbols. The firewood lots, if any, collected out of the lops and
tops of the felled trees should be given separate serial numbers.
(6) The measurement of the converted material obtained from each tree
felled, viz., logs, pieces, poles, firewood sticks, etc., should be done at the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

stump-site by a responsible official not lower in rank than a Forester. It is
his duty to examine the stump and the number and stamp marked on it and
compare the outturn of the converted material with the estimated yield of
the tree as noted in the Marking and Felling register and satisfy himself that
all the economical utilisable material has been converted from the tree, that
there is no avoidable wastage-during conversion and that the converted
material obtained from the tree is fully accounted for. The stump of the tree
should be stamped by a prescribed hammer mark by the official measuring
the timber after satisfying himself that no wrong tree has been felled. The
following instructions regarding the measurement of logs should be strictly
adhered to.
(i) The length of the log shall be measured from the first felling cut
i.e., that cut extending farthest into the length from the butt end of the
nearest cut at the top end and it should be done to the nearest 5 cm.;
(ii) In a log of regular taper, the mean girth shall be measured at the
mid-length of the log but not over the bark or any protuberances;
(iii) In a log with an irregular taper three girth measurements shall be
taken i.e., one at the mid-length, and one at each end, all underbark
and free of protuberances, the mean girth being obtained by taking
the average of these three measurements;
(iv) The girth measurements should be done to the nearest centimetre;
(v) The volume of the log in cubic metres should be reckoned up to
three places of decimals.
(7) The logs, pieces and poles should be stamped by the Forest Officer
measuring the timber with a hammer mark prescribed for the purpose
immediately they are measured and taken to stock. The measurements of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

logs, etc., obtained from the tree felled should be entered against the tree
number in the appropriate columns under 'outturn' in the "Marking and
felling register". The stocks of firewood if any, collected should similarly be
measured and their length, height, width and entered under the 'outturn'
column. Simultaneously, the outturn from each tree felled and converted,
should be entered in a register prescribed in Forest accounts code called
the 'Register of receipts'. This should be maintained separately for each
coupe and for separate produce like timber, bamboos, fuel etc. The Range
Forest Officer, should submit a copy of this form to the Divisional Forest
Officer along with the timber preparation bill of the contractor.
(8) Lops and tops and such other portions of the tree unsuitable for timber
and waste material obtained during logging and conversion may be
disposed off in the manner as the Conservator of Forest may direct.
C. Forests Contracts
62. Contracts and other instruments in matters connected with the business
of the Forest Department generally may be executed as shown below.- .
(a) Contracts under which revenue for timber, fuel and other forest
produce and rent for cultivation in lands under the control of the
Forest Department, is collected;
(b) Contracts of expenditure on conservancy and works and Development Plan Schemes.
63. (1) Contracts under which revenue for timber, fuel and other forest
produce and rent for cultivation in lands under the control of the Forest
Department is collected. These contracts may be divided into three classes
namely.
(i) Those in which the Department engages to extract and supply
certain produce to purchasers;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ii) those in which the Department sells to purchasers the right to
extract certain produce for themselves; and
(iii)those in which the Department grants leases in the land under
their control for cultivation.
(2) Leases of timber, fuel and all other Forest produce shall not be sold
otherwise than in tender-cum-auction. As a special concession however the
lease may be sold by private negotiations to Co-operative Societies of
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and other forest tribes, and to industrial units at the discretion of the State Government, or the Chief Conservator Forests when authorised. The lease register for forest lands and
minor Forest produce shall be in Forms 48-A and 48-B.
(3) Survey and demarcation of coupes for timber, firewood and bamboos
removals will be done in the same manner as in the case of coupes exploited by the Government agency, according to the prescriptions of the
Working Plans or Working Scheme and it should be completed six months
before the sale date. The Plan or the sketch of the coupe with its area and
the length of each of the boundary lines should also be prepared.
(4) In the case of timber coupes, a copy of the marking Register prescribed
in the Forest Accounts Code containing the trees marked for felling their
measurements and estimated yield should be sent to the Divisional Forest
Officer along with the Plan of the coupe. In the case of firewood coupes
standard or reserved tree to be reserved should be marked, numbered and
listed;. Marking 9f standard or reserved trees should be done as prescribed
in the Working Plan or Working Scheme or as per the executive order
issued by the competent authority. It should be done by an Officer not
below the rank of a Forester. The Range Forest Officer should check at
least 10 per cent of the number of standard or reserved so marked. The list
of standard or reserved trees should be prepared in triplicate, one for record in the Range Office, one for filing in the agreement at the Divisional
Forest Officer's Office and the third for supply to the contractor. When the
demarcation of coupe and the marking of the standard is completed, a
report should be submitted to the Divisional Forest Officer along with the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Plan of the Coupe and the list of the standard trees. The report should
contain the estimate of the value of the coupe with reference to the yield,
extraction and distance from the market.
(5) No bamboos shall be sold standing as all bamboos in the State are
either already leased or proposed to be leased to the Pulp and Paper
industries and for removals of Medars and Buruds. The Minor Forest
Produce has the usual lease period, commencing from 1st July to the end
of 30th June. The items of MFP included in the list, particulars of areas of
lease, any particular item of MFP or any other particular locality etc., should
be furnished by the Range Forest Officer six months in advance before the
commencement of the lease period to the Divisional Forest Officer to
facilitate him to arrange for its disposal by sale.

64. The forms of sale notification for various types of sale are provided in,
Appendices XVIII. XIX, XX, XXI, XXU, XXIII and XXIV.
65. Contracts of expenditure on conservancy and works and Plans
schemes.
In this clause, the normal works included are.
1. Regeneration and afforestation works;
2. Cultural operations, nursery works;
3. Logging including preparation of sleepers and poles;
4. Transport of timber and other produce;
5. Extraction, transport, cleaning and preparation of Sandalwood;
6. Construction and repairs of roads, bridges, buildings, etc.;
7. Collection of seeds;
8. Supply of articles of food to the departmental elephants;
9. Supply of articles of stores, tools and plants;
10. Demarcation of forests and fire protection works.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

66. (1) The above works may be executed by one of the under mentioned
methods.
(i) Departmentally by employing daily labour;
(ii) By petty contract system for works under Rs. 500-00; and
(iii) Piece work systein for works between Rs. 501 and Rs. 2,000-00;
(iv) By schedule contract.
(2) Method (i) will be 'adopted in cases where no contractors are available
or where for other reasons it is found necessary to undertake the work
departmentally in view of the remoteness of the area or urgency of the
work.
(3) Under method (ii) i.e., petty contract system, petty contractor has
merely to execute the specified work at the sanctioned schedule of rates.
The Department arranges for the supervision and the measurement of all
the works. The petty contract system shall ordinarily be. confined 'to works
costing less than Rs. 500-00. No agreement need be executed in cases
falling under this category, and no rate auction need be held, if
circumstances warrant such a situation.
(4) Works costing over Rs. 2,000 shall be executed only by calling for
tenders except for certain categories mentioned in the Forest Accounts
Code.
(5) For works costing less than Rs. 2,000 and more than Rs. 501 the piece
work system as prescribed in the Forest Accounts Code shall be adopted.
Agreement with Security deposit is necessary in cases falling under this
type. Rate is to be agreed upon by holding a rate auction subject to ceiling
of schedule of rates.
(6) Application for advances.-A fund application for works will be made by
the Range Forest Officer to the Divisional Forest Officer for the advances
required in connection with the works to be executed. While preferring such
applications, the Range Forest Officer shall indicate the works to be carried
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

out during the month and shall apply for the amount likely to be spent
during the month. The Cash Balance in the works Cash Book at the time of
application shall also be indicated. Fund application should be drawal of
fund for works only. No fund application shall be made for pay and
allowances of establishment. The Divisional Forest Officer shall exercise
dose scrutiny of such fund application and issue cheque only for the
amount likely to be spent during the period having due regard to the outstanding amount against the particular Range Forest Officer and the probability of recouping by work done or recovery of amount outstanding. The
fund application shall be in Form 69 of the Forest Accounts Code.
67. The form of notification for logging contracts is given in Appendix XXV.
68. Instructions regarding tenders.- (1) The Divisional Forest Officer
should open the tenders in the presence of the tenderers or their
authorised agents who may choose to be present at the time. The Officer
opening the tender should also initial all corrections in each tender which
have been initialed by the tenderer. If there are unattested corrections and
over writings in the tender a note of such corrections should be made in the
tender itself when it is opened. The Officer opening the tender should
prepare a list of the total number of tenders and opened by him and verify
the number the comparative statement of tenders.
(2) The Divisional Forest Officer himself will write all the details in the
tender chart. Even his findings and recommendations regarding tenders
received shall also be written by himself and submitted to the Conservator
of Forests or other competent authority in case the authority to sanction the
tender is not with him.
(3) The tenders and tender records after opening shall be in the personal
custody of the Divisional Forest Officer till they are submitted to the next
higher authority or till they are disposed off.
(4) In case where the Divisional Forest Officer himself is not the sanctioning
authority, he shall submit the tender records along with his findings within 5
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

days from the date of opening of the tender to the Conservator of Forests.
The Conservator of Forests shall submit to the Chief Conservator of
Forests within 10 days of receipt of tenders if he is not the authority to
sanction the tender. The Chief Conservator of Forests shall submit tender
to the Government within 10 days of receipt of tenders if he is not the
authority to sanction the tenders.
(5) The authority taking decision on the tender shall after the receipt of the
comparative statement and before the selection of a tender should examine
all the tenders and satisfy himself that no corrections which were not in the
tenders at the time he received them had been made in any of the tenders
subsequently.
(6) Whenever tenders are sent to the higher authorities for sanction mere
recommendatory letter will not suffice. The complete records of tender
including the tender chart along with the letter should be sent Drafts
covering the Earnest Money Deposit may, however be retained by the officer receiving the tenders.
69. All works regarding construction of buildings, roads, bridges, etc., the
cost of which exceeds Rs. 25.000 should be entrusted to the Public Works
Department. It is also necessary to entrust costly works needing special
engineering knowledge and skill to the P.W.D. for execution. All estimates
for new buildings, roads and bridges should be got scrutinised by the
Executive Engineer or any Officer authorised by him. However in respect of
repairs to buildings, roads, bridges, etc., the estimate need not be sent to
the P.W.D. for scrutiny but the sanctioned schedule of rates of the P.W.D.
should be adopted if the estimate is within Rs. 5,000-00.
70. If no tenders are received or if there is no time to inviting fresh tenders
or if the tenders received are not acceptable for valid reasons and if it is
very expedient to execute the work for which there is no alternative, such
works may be ordered, to be executed on piece work system without
calling for rate auction or tenders for works within Rs. 10,000 by the ConCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

servator of Forests and in all other cases by the Chief Conservator of Forests.
71. The acceptance of the tender will be communicated to the successful
tenderer either by registered post or by telegram depending upon the circumstances of the case and also will be notified in the Office Notice Board
of the Division or Circle or the Chief Conservator of Forests' Office as the
case may be. The successful tenderer shall be deemed to have accepted
the tender, the moment the same is notified in the Office Notice Board or
the telegram or the registered letter is communicated to him. .
72. Registration of contractors.-: Every person who desires to undertake
work or bid in auction sale or send in a tender for work or lease in the
Forest Department shall register himself as a contractor in the Forest Department. The rules for registration of contractors for taking forest lease
and for undertaking works are as under.
(1) Registration.-Every person who desires to undertake work or bid in
auction sale or send in a tender for work or lease in the Forest Department
shall register himself as a contractor in the Forest Department according to
the rules hereunder.
.
(2) Application for Registration.-(a) Every contractor shall apply for
registration in Form 7 to the Divisional Forest Officer or any other Forest
Officer authorised to function as a Divisional Forest Officer as the case may
be, in whose jurisdiction he wishes to undertake work or. bid in auction or
send in a tender.
(b) Every application for registration shall be accompanied by a challan for
Rs. 10 (Rupees ten only) being the application fee. The application fee will
not be refunded under any circumstances. The amount shall be remitted
into a Government Treasury under the head 'Forest Remittances' to the
credit for the forest division where the contractor wishes to undertake work
or bid in auction sale or send in a tender.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(3) Consideration of application.-The Divisional Forest Officer or such other
Forest Officer authorised in this behalf shall make such enquiries in
connection with the application as he considers necessary and call for any
further particulars from the applicant before finally disposing (If the application. The applicant shall provide the above officers with necessary facilities for verification of the particulars given in the application.
(4) Rejection of Application.- The Divisional Forest Officer or such other
Forest Officer authorised to register the contractors shall be at liberty to
reject any application for registration for administrative reasons or if the
particulars furnished in the application are incomplete or unsatisfactory or
the statements contained therein are found to be false. But before such
rejection, the authority concerned shall issue a sub-cause notice to the
applicant setting out briefly the reasons for the proposed rejection and giving him seven days time to make any representation. The said authority
shall then proceed to pass orders after taking into consideration any representation that may be received within the aforesaid period. The order shall
contain a brief statement of the reasons for the rejection of the application.
(5) Approval of Application and Registration.- (a) In the case of application which is found to be satisfactory, the Officer accepting the application shall intimate the applicant in writing the fact of his application having
been accepted. The applicant shall, within 15 days of the receipt of
information of acceptance of his application for registration, remit the
registration fee of Rs. 20 (Rupees. twenty only) into the Government
Treasury under the head 'Forest Remittances to the credit of the forest
division concerned and send the challan to the Officer concerned accepting
the application. The Officer, on receipt of the challan register the contractor
and inform the applicant of such registration accordingly.
(b) The registration fee will not be refunded under any circumstances to the
registered contractor.
(6) Renewal of Registration.- The registration should be renewed
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

annually by remitting a fee of Rs. 20 (Rupees twenty only) every year.
(7) Removal of Contractor.-(i) The registering officer may cancel a contractor's registration or keep his registration under suspension for a specific
period for justifiable reasons such as.
(a) professional misconduct like repeated violation of the contract
conditions, persistent bad work, etc.;
(b) bankruptcy or poor financial circumstances;
(c) insolvency in original proceedings or other activities which effectively prevent the contractor from doing proper justice to his role as
a registered contractor; and
(d) for any other valid reasons.
(ii) The registering officer shall give the contractor sufficient notice in writing
and obtain his representation before deciding on the cancellation or
suspension of registration on valid grounds.
(iii) The removal or suspension order shall be sent in writing to the
contractor to his permanent address. Copies of such orders shall be
communicated by the Registering Officer to the immediate superior officer
and to the other Officers under the immediate superior and to such other
departments under which the contractor is eligible to take up works by
virtue of his registration.
(iv) Removal of a name from the register of contractors maintained in an
office does not necessarily imply removal of the name from registers of
other offices, but the fact of removal from any register shall be entered in
the registers of all offices which have registered his name in their registers.
Such officers, if they so desire, can also without further enquiry remove the
name of the contractor from their registers and intimate the contractor
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

accordingly.
(v) An appeal against the order of cancellation or suspension of registration
by a District Forest Officer or other authorised Forest Officer shall be with
the next higher officer of the department, namely, the Conservator of
Forests and against such order of the Conservator of Forests shall be with
the Chief Conservator of Forests. The decision of the Appellate Authority
shall be final.
(vi) An appeal shall be preferred within a period of one month from the date
of issue of any orders and shall be accompanied by an appeal fee of Rs. 3
(Rupees three only) or Rs. 5 (Rupees five only) according to the appeal
being made to the Conservator of Forests or the Chief Conservator of Forests respectively. This amount shall either be remitted into a Treasury to
the credit of the Divisional Forest Officer or other authorised forest office of
a Division (in whose register the contractor is registered or in which division
he has worked) or sent in the form of Court fee stamp attached to the
appeal.
(8) Re-registration of contractors.- A contractor whose name has been
removed from the register once, may for valid reasons, be re-registered,
after a period of .one year by the authority competent to remove him from
the register, with the prior approval of the next higher authority to whom an
appeal against removal lies.
(9) Income-tax and Sales tax clearance certificate- Income-tax, Sales
tax clearance certificates shall be furnished to the authority with whom the
contractor is registered, failing which the contractor shall be prevented from
taking any work or bidding in auction or sending in a tender till such time as
the certificates are furnished.
(10) Court-fee stamp.- The application for registration or re-registration
should bear a court-fee stamp for Re. 1 (Rupee one only).
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(11) Exceptions.- Registration as contractors is not necessary in the following cases for leases or works.
(1) Sale of forest produce by retail sales on the basis of sanctioned
schedule of rates and in the case of licensees who remove forest
produce on the basis of seigniorage rates;
(2) All bidders who take part in the auction sales in timber Depots;
(3) Cases of industrial units wherein forest produce is sold on negotiations to them;
(4) All cases wherein works are executed through petty contractors
from time to time where the value of the contract and the estimate is
less than Rs. 500;
(5) Forest labourers, Co-operative Societies as well as Forest Tribal
Co-operative Societies;
(6) Kumri (Taungya) cultivation.
D. Forest Departmental Buildings, roads and Wells
73. The Forest Department is concerned with the management of the
following classes of buildings.
(i) Buildings constructed or purchased and maintained by the Forest
Department from forest funds;
(ii) Buildings ,not constructed or purchased by the Forest Department,
but which are assigned or transferred to it by Government arid are to
be maintained from forest funds;
(iii) Every Forest Officer 'in-charge of a Range should maintain a
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

register in Form 8 showing therein an account of all Forest departmental buildings like, Office buildings, residential quarters, resthouses, depot houses, storehouses, etc. The name of the building,
the type of construction, plinth area, the year of construction,
purchase or transfer capital value etc., should be entered in the
register. It should be a permanent register. An annual return in Form
28 shall be submitted by Range Forest Officer to Divisional Forest
Officer and by Divisional Forest Officer to the Conservator of Forests.
It will only be necessary to issue the necessary addenda and
corrigenda to entries therein, whenever a new building is constructed,
or an old one is demolished, or changes are made to the existing
buildings involving change of capital cost. In this register, the cost or
assessed value of the land comprised in the property should be
shown separately from the value of the building or buildings thereon.
In the case of a purchased property, the price paid should be apportioned, wherever possible, between the land and the building. There
is no need to distribute to individual buildings the value of the land
covered by a group of buildings;
(iv) Each Divisional Forest Officer and Conservator of Forests will
also keep a register of all Departmental buildings in his Division or
Circle respectively in the form prescribed under (iii) supra;
(v) The original plan, section and elevation and detailed measurements of every departmental building in the Range must be
maintained in the register by the Range Forest Officer. When any
alteration is made in any existing building, it shall be the duty of the
Range Forest Officer to see that the original plans of the building are
corrected on the completion of sum alteration. The boundaries of the
ground attached to any building should be distinctly shown in the
plan. When repairs to any particular building are found necessary, the
Range Forest Officer can easily take out the detailed measurements
from that register instead of having to make a plan and take fresh
measurements each time on the spot. For this purpose, every time a
completion report is submitted for a building, all that he has to do is to
take a copy of the plan, etc., of the completed work from the final
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

estimate and file it in the register referred to. Plans, etc., of important
buildings in a Division should be maintained likewise by the Divisional
Forest Officers;
(vi) In the preparation of designs and estimates for the construction of
buildings for the use of the Forest Department, the standard type
designs as drawn out by the Public Works Department for different
grades and purposes should be followed. Copies of all standard plans
should be maintained at the offices of the Chief Conservator of
Forests, Conservator of Forests and the Divisional Forest Officers.
(vii)Sites for quarters for Rangers, Foresters, Beat Guards, and other
Forest subordinates should be such that the subordinates with their
families can live without inconvenience in the houses constructed for
them. For this reason, such sites should not be selected in isolated
positions in the forests, but should be nearer to other Government
buildings (Forest, Police, Revenue; Public Works, etc,) or near
habitations in villages or towns. As far as possible, the land selected
should be forest area or Government waste land which can be
obtained without much cost. Finally there should be good water
supply close at hand. Without these essentials, the expenditure on
the building will be a waste of money as no official will occupy an
isolated house in the wilderness of a forest where there is no potable
water;
(viii) Construction of temples, mosques, churches, tombs, etc., within
the compounds of Government buildings should not be permitted.
Lists of such structures, if any, already existing, should be maintained
in each Divisional and Range Offices. No further extension or
erection of such structures should be permitted. Such structures; 'if
any’ already existing should not be maintained at the cost of the
Department;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ix) The Beat Guard, Watchman or Caretaker, whoever be in-charge
of a Forest rest-house, should be made responsible to see.
(1) that the rest-house is always kept clean, free from vermin,
white ants, wasp's nests, etc.;
(2) that the compound is clear of all undergrowth, and rubbish;
(3) that the roads within the compound are scraped off grass
and other weed growth and are kept in good repair;
(4) that the compound fences are kept in good repair;
(5) that the furniture, utensils, crockery, cutlery, etc., are kept
dean and tidy; and
(6) that the plants, shrubs, and creepers planted in the
compound are properly looked after and tendered.
(7) the Range Forest Officers and the Divisional Forest Officers
should make frequent inspections of all buildings in their respective jurisdictions and see that the buildings, the compounds
attached to them and the furniture, etc., therein are kept in good
order and under proper repairs. They should take prompt action
to set right any defects noticed by them.
(x) The following points should receive the careful attention of the
Range Forest Officer.
(1) All leaks in roofs must immediately be made watertight;
(2) Drains for roof drip should be put in order at the beginning of
the rains;
(3) The compound fences should be kept in repair and no cattle
allowed-into the compound;
(4) The buildings including kitchen houses and latrines must be
kept locked when not occupied;
(5) Bolts of doors or windows which may have been damaged
or lost should be promptly replaced;
(6) All Open wells in 'the compound of forest buildings should
have their water baled out at the end of rains;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xi) Wells situated in the compounds of Government offices should be
provided with buckets or pots and ropes for the convenience of those
who use them, the cost being met from the contingent grant of the
office concerned;
(xii) The Range Forest, Officer should submit estimates for annual
repairs to buildings in his charge to the Divisional Forest Officer at the
beginning of each year and for special repairs, periodically, whenever
necessary. Supplementary estimates for urgent repairs may be sent
at any time whenever such repairs are
necessitated;
(xiii) Powers regarding the sale or dismantlement of forest buildings
and the authorities competent to order such sale or dismantlement
are contained in the Manual of Financial Powers, 1959;
(xiv) The permanent transfer of buildings in-charge of the Forest
Department to other departments and vice versa requires the orders
of Government;
(xv) Orders of Government should likewise be obtained when residential buildings have 10 be classified permanently as non-residential
and vice versa. Temporary or “Katch” buildings will, however, be
exempted from the operation of this rule.
74. (1) The Range Forest Officer should see that all roads in-charge of the
Department are kept in proper repair. The following points should be attended to when carrying out repair.
(i) All kilometre--posts should be renewed and repainted when necessary;
(ii) The drainage system of roads should be improved and renewed
where necessary; to effect this satisfactorily, roads should be
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

inspected at the beginning of the monsoon, and after;
(iii) Ruts, hollows and pits should be filled in with suitable material;
(iv) All obstructions should be cleared, including overhanging
branches and side cover likely to hinder traffic;
(v) Bridges and culverts on forest roads must be examined at the
beginning and end of the rains, to see if they are safe and put right
any defect that may then be noticed.
(2) No dragging of timber along any, road should ever be permitted.
Infringement of this rule by villagers or contractors should be reported by
the Beat Guards to the Range Forest Officer concerned.
(3) When a bridge or culvert is unsafe for the passage of traffic over it,
warning boards should be put up at either end of the bridge or culvert,
prohibiting the movement a traffic over it. The approaches to the bridge or
culvert from either end may be provided with barriers. If possible, a
deviation road may be formed to cross the river or nala across its bed at a
convenient point.
(4) During the fire season, fire tracing should be done all round the wooden
bridges and culverts to prevent the wooden material of the bridge or culvert
getting caught by forest fire.
(5) All abnormal floods should be marked on bridge piers and abutments by
a thick white or engraved mark, the top of the mark representing the
highest flood.
(6) Best season for repairing earthen or metal roads is just after the rains
when the soil is still moist and can easily be worked and consolidated. All
the ruts, holes and pits should be loosened with a pickaxe and filled with
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

earth, or gravel, from the side ditches or burrow pits. The soil should be
well beaten down and the surface restored to its proper shape. In the case
of metalled roads, such ruts and pits should first be cut out to square ends.
If soiling has been destroyed, it must be replaced by boulders or stones,
and then metal laid and rammed over with gravel. If repairs by patching
cannot effectively be restored to, it will be necessary to renew the whole
surface of the road by consolidating a new surface layer of metal and
gravel after removing the old surface by picking.
75. (1) Wells be dug during summer months when the water-table is low.
(2) All permanent wells should be provided with proper steining to keep the
sides from falling and to prevent any surface drainage from entering into
the well and polluting the water. The steining may be of stone or brick set in
cement or lime morter or it may be of R.C.C. rings or cement concrete cast
ill situ. Generally, for forest wells, an inside diameter of 120 cm. would be
sufficient.
(3) The exact depth to which the well was originally sunk should be
recorded in the office.
(4) Once in every year, the entire water from the well should be baled out
and cleaned thoroughly up to the exact depth' of which it was sunk. The
cleaning of a well is generally carried out in seasons when the water supply
runs low.
(5) The steining of wells should be raised above the ground level into a
parapet wall.
(6) A masonry or concrete platform should be provided round the well
proper, sloping away from the well, to prevent any water lifted out of the
well and use for washing; etc., from flowing back into the well.
(7) No trees should be allowed to grow near a masonry-lined well, since
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

their roots are likely to force their way through and crack the masonry.
(8) A covering should be provided over the well to prevent leaves and other
foreign matter from falling into it. The best form of covering would be a light
open shed roofed with tiles or corrugated iron or asbestos sheets.
(9) No cattle sheds, stables, latrines, and baths, should be allowed to exist
in the vicinity. of shallow wells. The most common cause of contamination
is the entry of surface drainage water, sewage and industrial waste and
hence, the necessity for providing a proper lining to prevent the inflow of
surface drainage, etc.
76. A separate account should be kept of all the Departmental permanent
roads in a register in Form 9 maintained in each Divisional and Range
Forest Offices. Similarly, an account of all permanent wells should be kept
in the Divisional and Range. Forest Offices in a register in Form 10. Annual
returns in respect of wells and roads shall be submitted in Form 28 by the
Range Forest Officer to Divisional Forest Officer and Divisional Forest Officer to Conservator of Forests.
E. Exploitation of Sandalwood.
77. (1) All Sandalwood trees whether growing in Government, private or
Inam land will be exploited through the Government agency only.
(2) The value of Sandalwood is so great, that it is of paramount importance
to protect against loss of Sandalwood to Government at every stage of
operations beginning with the enumeration of trees, marking, uprooting,
rough dressing, transport to depots, final cleaning, classification and storage, until the wood is sold.
(3) Exploitation of Sandal trees will generally be by selection felling, where
only dead, dying spike-diseased and fallen trees including old stumps and
roots are marked for extraction.
(4) The unit of area for annual exploitation of Sandal trees will generally be
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the entire area of a Range and therefore the entire area of a Range will
form the annual coupe and will have to be gone .over every year for purposes of extract; on of Sandal trees. This is because, the Sandal trees do
die in appreciable numbers every year in forest and such trees cannot be
left over unexploited for any length of time, on account of the value of the
wood. However, this rule may be exempted in Ranges having extensive
Sandal bearing zones where it may not be possible to go over the entire
area of the Range every year for extracting Sandal trees. In such cases,
the entire Range area may be divided into 2 or 3 blocks of convenient sizes
and each block forming an annual coupe every second or third year in
rotation. '
(5) Wherever Working Plans exist for the exploitation of Sandalwood, the
area of coupe shall be as per the prescriptions of such plan.
78. (1) Before the end of each official year, the Range Forest Officer should
submit an estimate to the Divisional Forest Officer for the selection and
marking of Sandal trees in the coupe to be worked in the following year.
The estimate should deal separately with the Government lands and
private lands, and contain the details for each coupe. It should provide for
marking the trees to be extracted, timber cutting and such other tending as
may be prescribed in the Working Plan or Working scheme, if there be one,
or in any executive orders or instructions issued by the Divisional Forest
Officer from time to time.
(2) The enumeration and tending should be taken up as soon as possible
on receipt of sanction for the estimate by the Divisional Forest Officer or his
orders in this behalf.
(3) For the proper selection of trees fit for exploitation, it is necessary that
the subordinate in-charge should comb the area by strips with a line of
mazdoors at short intervals from each other, so that no tree may be
missed.
(4) On every selected tree, stump or root, as the case may be, a Deep
blaze will be cut and its serial number will be written on the blaze in bold
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

legible figures with tar or paint. 'The same serial number will be continued
throughout the coupe, and every tree (standing or fallen), stump or root will
ha\'e its own serial number. However, separate serial numbers will be given
for each private holding in which the trees are marked 'for extraction. The
subordinate in-charge of enumeration and marking' will maintain a Field
book in Form 11, and as each tree is marked, he will enter in it the number,
description girth, approximate length of stem and situation of the tree, using
a carbon paper to make a duplicate copy. Every such tree marked for
felling should be stamped by the Range Forest Officer or the Forester with
a hammer prescribed just above the root stock after removing the
superficial bark and sapwood. As soon as the enumeration is completed,
the subordinate in charge of the work should prepare an abstract of all the
trees marked in the coupe in 15 cm. girth classes under the following
headings, viz., trees, fallen trees, stumps and roots, and submit it to the
Range Forest Officer along with the duplicates of the Field book.
(5) The Range Forest Officer should check at least 50 per cent of the trees
marked in each coupe and the trees checked by him should be initialled
and dated in the Field book. The Field book should be authenticated and
used by the Divisional Forest Officer and the Range Forest Officer for
checking enumeration in the field.
(6) The estimated yield of the coupe in each girth class should be based on
the yield tables or on the results of previous extractions in the same coupe
or of the nearest adjoining coupe.
(7) As soon as the enumeration. marking and tending work is completed,
the Range Forest Officer should send a completion report to the Divisional
Forest Officer together with an estimate for the extraction, rough dressing
and transport of the wood to the Sandalwood Depot.
(8) (a) The estimate should provide for (i) uprooting of the trees and rough dressing of the wood; and
(ii) transport of the .rough dressed wood from the forest to the Sandalwood Depot. The name of the Depot as well as its average
distance from the marked trees should be specified.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(b) The following enclosure should accompany the estimates.
(i) The duplicate copy of the field book with Columns 1 to 5 filled in;
(ii) An abstract of the trees marked in 15 cm. girth classes showing
the estimated yield of the coupe in each girth class;
(iii) Certificate by the Range Forest Officer that he checked not less
than 50 per cent of the trees marked in each coupe arid the area or
locality where such checking was made.
79. 1. The extraction, rough dressing and transport work should generally
be done departmentally under strict supervision.
2. Extraction.-(a) Extraction of Sandalwood should be taken up during
early part of the year alone so as to fully utilise the entire monsoon period
for extracting Sandal trees and to enable transporting the entire quantity
extracted during the year to the Depot before the close of the year.
(b) Trees should normally be extracted in serial order.
(c) A responsible forest subordinate notbe1ow the rank of a Forester
should be in charge of the sandal extraction work.
(d) As the trees are extracted. Columns 6 and 7 of the Field book should be
filled in by the subordinate m char~ of the work. In column 7, the letter 'H' or
'S' should be noted depending on whether the tree extracted is a heartwood or sap-wood tree.
(e) All trees, stumps and roots should be uprooted by digging the earth
round the base of the trees deep enough to severe all lateral roots and
rootless containing heart-wood and then cutting through the bigger roots
and main root, so that the trees may fall by their own leverage. No root that
contains heart-wood of one centimeter and above in diameter should be left
in the ground. After the tree is uprooted, the pit should be numbered with
the same number of the tree uprooted. The number of the pit may be noted
on the nearest tree or rock. In case there is no tree or rock nearby, the
number should be noted on a strong peg fixed in the pit.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(f) Extraction should be confined to the trees, stumps and roots already
marked for the purpose. If, however, any tree, stump, or root is noticed to
have been omitted to be marked, either due to oversight or in case of tree,
due to its death having occurred subsequent to the marking, it should be
marked and extracted~ giving it a sub-number corresponding to the
number of the tree, stump or root nearest to it. Thus for example, if the tree,
stump or root to be marked and extracted in this manner is situated near a
tree, stump or root bearing serial number 10 marked already, it will be numbered 10-A. All such supplementary trees, stumps or roots should be entered at the end of the Field book with the necessary details.
(g) All dead, diseased and dying trees should be uprooted and preserved
until they are inspected and destroyed by the Range Forest Officer. The
Range Forest Officer should personally inspect such trees and if they do
not contain heartwood or if they contain heartwood less than 1 cm. in
diameter, he should bum them in his presence, submitting a list of such
trees to the Divisional Forest Officer with- a certificate that the trees were
inspected and found to contain no heartwood or contained heartwood less
than 1 cm. in diameter and hence burnt in his presence. Such destruction
of trees, in respect of private lands, should be done by the Range Forest
Officer in the presence of the owner of the land or his authorised agent
under a mahazar or panchanama. Similar procedure should be followed
with regard to destruction of sapwood branches and branches containing
less than 1 cm. heart-wood.
80. (1) After uprooting the tree, the top and small branches that do not
contain heart wood should be lopped off. There is no need to saw off the
root and branches containing heartwood, unless the tree is too large to be
transported to the Depot in one piece. Otherwise, the root should be sawn
off so as not to include any portion of the stem and the branches should be
sawn flush with the stem. If it is found necessary to further sub-divide the
stem or branch wood into convenient lengths, it may' be done by means of
saw. The sawdust obtained while sawing should be carefully collected, free
from impurities for sending to the Depot subsequently. No rough dressing
of Sandalwood shall be done in the field. It shall be done only at the SanCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

dalkoti.
(2) The cut ends of each piece of Sandalwood should be hammer marked
with the prescribed Government property mark and the number of the tree
as well as the number of the root, stem or branch with its distinguishing
letter, if any should be written on each and every piece of Sandalwood'
obtained. Thus for example, letters 'RT' for root-trees, 'S1', 'S2' etc., for
stem pieces 'B1', 'B2', etc., for main branch pieces 'BI(a)', 'BI(b)', etc., for
side branches, 'rl', 'r2', etc., for the lateral and side roots and letter 'R' for
main root should be written. Should the main branch 'Bl' be billetted, the
pieces will be numbered 'B1(1)', 'B1(2)', and so on. In addition to the tree
number and other details referred to above, every piece of rough dressed
wood should also bear distinguishing letters and numbers to indicate the
name of the Range, the name of the coupe or the survey number of the
village, etc., to which they belong. Thus, for example, the first stem piece of
tree 10 of Hoskote Range may be indicated H 10-51. These should be
written in tar or paint. Simultaneously length and mid-girth measurements
of each tree, billet, root, etc., should be taken and recorded in a Register in
Form 12 (Extraction Register). This register should be filled up by the
subordinate as extraction proceeds, columns 2, 3 and 4 being copied from
the entries in the Field book.
(3) As soon as the extraction is completed and the measurements recorded, the materials may be collected at convenient centres of collection
or forest' depots, for subsequent despatch to Kotis. The subordinate in
charge of the operation should stack the Sandalwood in forest depots in
separate lots, each containing one cart or lorry load, as the case may be.
Each such stack should have the full complement of the wood obtained
from the trees concerned, so that each consignment of sandalwood to be
despatched to the Depot may have the full compliment of the trees
concerned to .facilitate checking at the destination.
(4) The Sandalwood collected in forest depots should not be allowed to
accumulate unnecessarily, but should be sent to sales depots as early as
possible. Sandalwood extracted in any month should, as far as possible, be
despatched to the Depot before the close of the succeeding month. The
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

subordinate in-charge of extraction shall be responsible for the safety of the
collected wood from fire or theft, till it is despatched to the Depot.
(5) The Range:Forest officer shall, during the period of extraction of
Sandalwood, frequently inspect and supervise over the extraction and conversion operations. He should see that the following points are observed.
(i) that the ground hidden roots are completely extracted;
(ii) that the portions of the tree containing heartwood over and above
one centimeter in diameter are fully extracted not left over;
(iii) that the extraction operation is proceeding according to the serial
order of trees in the Field book;
(iv) that the pits are marked after extracting the tree;
(v) that the extracted material is properly, numbered marked,
stamped and measured according to rules;
(vi) that the yield of extracted material compares, well with the
measurements and description of the tree in the Field;
(vii) that the extraction register is properly posted up;
(viii) that adequate precautions are taken by the subordinate in
charge of the work for the safety of the collected material.
(ix) that the trees containing no heartwood or heart-wood less than 1
cm. in diameter are extracted and kept for his inspection;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(x) that all the trees marked for extraction are collected; and
(xi)that the collected material is despatched to Depots regularly within
the prescribed time and that the transit rules are observed strictly.
(6) The Divisional Forest Officer should make frequent inspection of Sandal
extraction works and take prompt actions to set right any defects that he
may observe during such inspections.
(7) A register as prescribed in Forest Accounts Code (Collection and
removal of Sandalwood) should be maintained by each Range Forest Officer, a copy of which should be rendered every month to the Divisional
Forest Officer.
81. Sandalwood seized in Forest offence cases including that of undetected cases should be taken to stock in the form prescribed in Forest accounts code. Wood pertaining to undetected cases should be consigned to
the Depot for disposal. In respect of offence cases prosecuted, the wood
returned to the Department by a Court order should be sent to the Depot
for disposal.
82. (a) Rules for the despatch of sandalwood from forests to Depots, issue
of transit passes, checking and weiging the sandalwood at the Depot and
the issue of a receipt for the wood received at the Depot are contained in,
Chapter XVI (Transit Rules) of the Karnataka Forest Rules, 1969 and
Karnataka Forest Manual.
(b) Chips and sawdust should be sent in sealed gunny bags.
(c) All transport of Sandalwood from Forests to Depots should be done
during day time.
(d) No consignment of sandalwood should be sent to Depots on Depot
holidays and outside the Depot working hours.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(e) A responsible official, of and above the rank of a Forest Guard, should
accompany each consignment of Sandalwood and he shall be responsible
for the Sandalwood consigned from the time it is loaded into vehicles till it is
checked and weighed at the Depot on its delivery.
83. When the Sandalwood reaches the Depot, the forest subordinate
escorting the consignment shall deliver the transit pass with the measurement list and the sandalwood to the Depot Officer who shall attend to the
following immediately.
(i) He shall spread the contents of each vehicle or the whole consignment as the case may be, separately and verify the number of
pieces with the details given in the pass;
(ii) He shall test check the measurements of at least 25 per cent of
the trees, comparing them with those recorded in the measurement
list accompanying the pass;
(iii) He shall examine if the extraction is properly done and the roots
fully extracted. If serious defects are found, the trees or billets
concerned shall be kept apart for the inspection of the Divisional
Forest Officer;
(iv) The cut ends should be carefully examined to see if they bear
the transit marks;
(v) He shall weigh the contents of each vehicle separately, if
necessary, and then add up the total weight of the consignment;
(vi) Sandalwood received from private lands shall be weighed
separately for each private ownership and stocked and accounted
separately;
(vii) Any discrepancies noticed between the quantity despatched, and
the quantity received should be noted in the remarks column of the
receipt issued. Explanations for the same should be obtained from
the escort and recorded;
(viii) Checking, verification and weighment of wood should be done in
the. presence of the escort and his signature obtained in the
Weighment Register prescribed in the Forest account code and in
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Form '50 of this code in token of his presence at the time of
weighment and the receipt in the prescribed form issued to him after
obtaining his acknowledgement.
84. (a) Final preparation of Sandalwood at the Depot may be done by
engaging a contractor or departmentally by appointing staff of workmen
either on monthly pay or on daily wages. In the latter case, it may be
necessary to supply the requisite tools for the cleaning work. But in the
former case, the contractor shall have to make his own arrangements for
the tools, etc., required for the purpose. However, whatever tools that the
Depot may have ill its stock will, whenever possible, be made available for
use by the contractor's workmen and the contractor shall be bound to
return such tools in good condition on expiry of the contract.
(b) If the Depot is equipped with a saw bench, it will be made available for
use by the contractor for the preparation of Sandalwood, charging such
rates as are in force.
(c) The contractor shall, during .the period of contract, keep adequate
workmen to prepare and supply the quantity of finally cleaned wood fixed
for delivery each month.
(d) The contractor and his workmen shall work in the depot under the strict
supervision of the Depot officer during the hours fixed by him and he shall
be liable to the Department {or any loss or damage caused by him or his
workmen.
(e) All contracts for the preparation of Sandalwood at the Depot should,
among other things, include the following items of works.
(i) Rough-dressing of un-dressed wood, received at the depot;
(ii) Unloading, weighing and stocking of sandalwood received at the
depot;
(iii) Classification and weighing of finally prepared wood and stacking
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

such wood in lots class-warincluding White Chips;
(iv) Weighment and stacking of rough or prepared wood at the time of
Depot stock taking;
(v) Weighing and loading of Sandalwood into Sandal-oil Factory
lorries including the stitching of gunny bags;
(vi) Weighing, loading and transport of Sandalwood from the Depot to
Government Sandalwood Oil Factories or to the Railway stations and
loading the wagons thereat.
(f) No payment shall be made to the contractor for the Sandalwood dust
collected during conversion.
(g) The Depot Officer shall always take precautionary measures to prevent
any fire occurring in the Depot premises and to extinguish immediately any
such fires occurring.
(h) No smoking should be allowed, either by the Depot staff or by the
Contractor and his workmen, within the Depot premises.
(i) Proper watch and ward should always be maintained in the depot both
during day and night to prevent any loss by theft. A suitable arrangement
for checking of persons and vehicles leaving the Depot premises should be
maintained, to prevent surreptitious removals of Sandalwood.

85. Weighment and delivery of wood sold or supplied.-(1) Weighment
and delivery of Sandalwood from the depot shall only be done by the officer
empowered in this behalf under the provisions of the rules in force. The
Delivery officer will be responsible to see that the purchasers produce
proper challans for the credit of the sale amount due and produce
necessary letter of authority if the purchasers are not present for taking
delivery. The weighment and delivery will be effected by the Delivery
officer, in the presence of the Depot officer if the Depot officer himself is not
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the Delivery officer. The accuracy of the weighing machines should be
tested with standard weights and the defects, if any, should be set right
before weighing the wood for delivery. Only as much wood of the class
which is required for delivery as can be weighed and delivered in a day
should be taken out and stacked near the scales. At the end of the day's
work. any wood already brought outside the Godown, that may remain
unweighed and undelivered; should be put back in the original place and
the godown locked and sealed. When once the wood is weighed and
delivered to the purchaser, it will be in charge of the purchaser In the Depot
premises at his risk until removed by him.
As soon as the wood sold to each purchaser is delivered, necessary
transactions should be noted in the concerned registers.
(2) Register showing deficits due to driage etc., should be in Form 49.
F. Stores, Tools, Plant and Government tents
86. (1) Office stores, tools and plant and other equipment of the Forest
department will generally be classified as follows.
(i) Surveying and other instruments;
(ii) Machinery;
(iii) Tools;
(iv) Furniture;
(v) Tents;
(vi) Departmental stamping hammers;
(vii) Elephant accoutrements;
(viii) Building materials, small stores, house fittings;
(ix) Vessels, utensils, crockery, cutlery, etc.;
(x) Miscellaneous.
(2) A permanent register of stores, tools and plant classified as above
should be kept in the Form 59 prescribed in the Forest Accounts Code.
This must be written up as and when articles are received and disposed of
and should be closed and balanced periodically while submitting returns to
higher authorities in the Form 60 prescribed in the Forest Accounts Code. :

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(3) In the remarks column of the register, a note should be made of surplus;
articles, that are no longer required so that they may be transferred to other
offices or departments needing 'them or be sold before they depreciate in
value. Similarly, if any of the articles have become unserviceable, a remark
to that effect should be made against such articles in the remarks column.
(4) The value of the article and the date of purchase or supply should
invariably be entered in the appropriate columns of the register. If the
article is supplied or transferred from some other office, the name of such
office from which it was received should also be mentioned.
(5) All articles should be listed serially in the register according to their
respective dates of receipt under each head. In the case, however, of
articles of the same kind and dimensions, the value of each of which is the
same, they may be grouped together provided their date of receipt is the
same, otherwise, they may be entered separately. Thus, when 10 munties
of the same kind, dimensions and value are received on one day and their
receipt is to be entered under the heading: 4tools' after the serial number,
say, 12 already recorded, the new entry will bear serial number 13/1 to
13/10.
(6) The value of each item entered in the register will be the cost price of its
acquisition and will remain at that price in the register until finally disposed
of.
(7) All articles must be described properly in the register. When an entry
relates, say, to a table, it is not sufficient if it is merely described as a table
The kind of wood from which the table is prepared, its size, whether with
drawers or without drawers, with locks and keys or not should be described. If a prismatic compass is referred to, the entry should indicate the
size of the compass, the metal from which it is made, maker's name, number marked, with or without stand or case and such other particulars. When
a mathematical instrument box has to be described, the description should,
among other things, also state the contents of the box. In the case of locks,
their diameter, the metal of which they are made. the number, if any, cut on
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

them by the makers, and the maker’s name should be stated. In other
words, the descriptions in all cases should be such that it admits of easy
identification of every kind of stock shown in the register.
(8) In addition to the descriptions, the articles themselves should, whenever
possible, be marked with identification numbers painted on them in white
lead. The number painted on each article will be the same as that assigned
to it in the register. The letters 'K.F.D’ may also be cut neatly or printed on
each article to indicate that it is the property of the Karnataka Forest
Department. All articles of stores, tools and 'plant should be numbered in
the manner indicated, and when any of them are referred to, they must be
identified by the number which they bear along with the description made of
them in the Register.
(9) All articles that may be purchased for such temporary works as a road
or building construction should be accounted for in the register, though the
cost thereof may be charged to the work concerned. The original entries of
receipts should invariably refer to the invoice or other authority sanctioning
or ordering the purchase. Similarly, disposals can only be made under
proper sanction to which proper references should be made in the register.
When any articles are sold or written off, the entries of disposal should refer
to the authority sanctioning the sale, or write-off and the value realised at
the sale. A disposal entry will be made in respect of any stock only when it
is either sold, written off, or permanently transferred from the office and not
when it is issued to a subordinate in the Range for the purpose of enabling
him to do the work assigned to him. In such cases the subordinates'
receipts should be obtained in acknowledgement of the evidence of the
existence of the article with him.
(10) All officers entrusted with the care, use or consumption of stores are
responsible for maintaining them in proper custody and in good order and
serviceable condition and keeping correct records and preparing correct
returns of them. Any loss or damage to stores should forthwith be reported
to the authority competent to deal with the matter. The heads of offices and
other controlling officers should inspect the articles under their direct
charge, as well as those in charge of their subordinate offices, as often as
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

possible, in each year and set right promptly any defects noticed.
(11) The Range Forest officer is responsible for the safety and, upkeep of.
or damage, or loss to, all Government ~, tools and plant under his charge,
either in the Beats or in the Range Offices or in Forest Rest-houses. Every
officer, on first assuming charge of a Range, must satisfy himself as to the
condition of the stocks he takes charge of, and in the case of stock at a
distance from headquarters, he must inspect the same as soon as possible
after assuming charge and note their condition. Unless any loss or
dan1age is promptly taken to the notice of the Divisional Forest Officer with
the explanation of the subordinate directly responsible for it, he will render
himself personally liable to make good any such loss or damage.
(12) The Mad of each office shall be responsible for taking stock annually
at the end of each year comparing the actual stock with the entries in the
stock register and submitting a report of the results of stock taking of the
previous year to his immediate superior in Form 60 prescribed in Forest
Account Code. He should compare the actual stock with the entries made
in the prescribed Form of Forest Account Code and record a certificate at
the foot of the return to the following effect ‘I certify, that I have inspected
the register of articles of stores, tools and plant and have found that it has
been kept up-to-date and that the articles mentioned therein are actually
held in stock with the exception of those noted in the remarks column with
necessary explanations, and that no articles have been written off except
under proper sanction and that necessary steps have been taken to fix up
the responsibilities in respect of missing articles".
(13) A monthly account of receipts, issues and balances in respect of
affected items of stores, tools and plant in Form FAC 60 should be submitted by the subordinate offices to the Divisional Forest Officer who should
check them with reference to sanctions accorded and orders issued. The
annual return which should be 'sent in the .same form' should be checked
with reference to all the monthly returns and forwarded to the Conservator
of Forests separately for each Range and for the Divisional Forest Office.
The printed certificate at the foot of the return regarding the counting and
the result thereof should be suitably completed and signed by the Divisional
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Forest Officer or the Range Forest Officer, as the case may be.
(14) Certificate of stock-taking is also required to be given by the Conservators of For, in respect of articles of stores, tools, and plant in their own
charge and will deal finally with the certificates of stock-taking submitted to
them by subordinate officers.
(15) These periodical returns will enable Divisional Forest Officers and
Conservators of Forests to take timely action to .fix responsibility in the
case of shortages.
(16) The Conservator of Forests should submit to the ChiefCon5erVator of
Forests by the end of July each year a consolidated return of accounts of
departmental stores of his circle. The Chief Conservator of Forests will
prepare a consolidated return of departmental stores and send it to the
Accountant General, Bangalore by 1st September, for inclusion in the Appropriation account and Audit report.
(17) All issues of stores, etc., must be made on indents and separate
registers should be maintained in the Divisional Forest Offices in Forms 61
and 62 of Forest Account Code for the stores issued to each Range. A list
of stores to be issued should be prepared in triplicate and should
accompany each issue and one copy should be returned duly
acknowledged and signed by the received officer. These lists and indents
will be numbered to correspond with the entries in Form 61 of Forest
Account Code and on being returned should be filed with that register. The
Divisional Forest Officer should take his register with him when inspecting
the Range and should check stores actually on fund.
(18) The Conservator of Forests 'will inspect the register of stores tools and
plant when inspecting subordinate offices. Similarly. the Divisional Forest
Officer during the course of his inspection of subordinate offices will check
and compare the articles in charge of his subordinate officers with his own
register and see that the stock and the accounts are properly maintained.
(19) Whenever any new articles are purchased, a certificate to the effect
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

that they have been taken to stock in the Register of stores, tools and plant,
quoting the serial number of the item in the register, should always be
given in the relevant voucher before it is charged in the accounts. The
certificates for charges on account of purchase of furniture or other stores
and materials should be as follows;
(i) "I certify that the materials and stores billed for above have been
brought on the respective inventories viz., at serial number of the
Register and that all materials and stores are being duly accounted
for and verified in the manner laid down in Article 169 of The
Karnataka Financial Code, 1958";
(ii) "I certify that the purchases billed for have been received in good
order, that their quantities are correct and their quality good, that the
rates paid are not in excess of the accepted and the market rates and
'that suitable notes of payments have been recorded against the
original `indents and invoices-concerned to prevent double payment".
(20) Purchase of all articles of stores, tools and plant required by the
Department is governed and regulated by the provisions made in the
Stores Purchase Rules.
(21) All indents, for the supply of articles, to the Stores Purchase Committee should, as far as possible, conform to the specifications drawn up
and approved by the Indian Standards Institution.
(22) The value of all articles of stores, tools and plant will remain at the cost
price of their acquisition until they are finally disposed of. There is no
necessity to make an assessment of annual depreciation in value and show
the value of the article at a reduced rate. When any necessity arises for refixing the value of an article, as in the cases of recovery of value of articles
from persons respons1ble for their loss or damage, then alone, the
valuation of such articles may be done by officers not below the rank of
Divisional Forest Officers taking into full consideration the circumstances
leading to such loss or damage, the cost price of the article, the period of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

service it had given since the time-of its purchase and allowing a
reasonable percentage of annual depreciation in value.
(23) No article should be condemned as unserviceable when it could be
repaired and made use of for some more time.
(24) The controlling officers during the course of their inspection of the
subordinate offices Rest-houses, etc., should particularly make it a point to
examine the adequacy or otherwise of the articles of furniture, vessels,
utensils, crockery, cutlery, etc., and take prompt steps to replenish in cases
of shortage.
(25) No article of stores, tools and plant may be written off the departmental
accounts and stock registers without the sanction of the competent.
(26) Any disposal of articles of stores, tools and plant by sale should be by
public auction and provisions relating to sale of forest produce are generally applicable to these articles also.
(27) Procedure and rules laid down by the Stores Purchase Committee
should be followed in respect of all purchases of articles of stores, tools
and plant.
87. Rules for the supply, care, maintenance and disposal of Government
tents are contained in Appendix V to this code.
C. Control and Management of Departmental Elephants
88. General -For exploitation of timber in inaccessible tracts of forests,
maintenance of. a sufficient number of trained elephants for the purpose of
dragging timber 'to road or cart-track sides for further transport by other
means of conveyance is often. found to be very advantageous and
necessary too. In addition to -this, they are also employed for arranging
logs in depots, loading timber into vehicles, riding, public purposes and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

sometimes as kumkis for capturing elephants.
89. The departmental requirement of elephants will, as a rule, be met by
annual or periodical captures of wild elephants in certain forest areas which
are the natural habitats of wild elephants. They will usually be captured by
one of the three methods, viz., (1) Pit-fall method (2) Khedda method and
(3) Open capture (Byle-Shikar method), the choice of the method
depending upon the facilities prevailing, circumstances, costs involved and
the number of elephants required to be captured. The pit-fall method is
resorted to when it is intended to capture only a few animals, more
economically, for departmental requirement. The Khedda method is
adopted for capturing large number of elephants, say a herd 'Or more,
whenever it is found necessary to afford relief to agriculturists from the
ravages caused to growing crops by wild elephants and whenever a
spectacular effect is desired to attract tourists, etc. The open capture (Byleshikar) method is adopted when favorable circumstances present for such
capture.
90. Training of Captives.- (1) After an elephant is captured, as soon as
possible, a Mahout should be employed for each elephant intended to be
retained by the Department to train the animal and he may be given an
assistant (Kothal or cavady) to help him in removing dung etc., and for
washing and feeding the animal. For 5OII\e days, pouring of water on the
animal should be continued. Kind treatment and frequent feeding with
sugarcane, jaggery and plantains will tame the captive quickly. The kraal or
the Peelkhana should be kept scrupulously dean and disinfected now and
then. The dung and waste fodder should be removed daily. The wounds of
the captives should be dressed daily according to the instructions of the
Veterinary staff and care should be taken that maggots are not allowed to
generate. The wounds may be washed by a garden syringe and dressed
with the help of cotton tied at the end of a long stick until the animal is
approachable. Fodder of different varieties, such as, leaf and branch fodder
of trees belonging to Ficus family, grass. bamboo leaves, tender bamboo
shoots, reeds, creepers of different kinds should be used for feeding the
captives. The animal should be bathed both at morning and evening preferably by taking it to the nearest river with the aid of Kumkis.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(2) The new captives should be trained for one hour every morning and
evening. The taming should start with rubbing the body of the captive by
means of a brush for a few days. This should be followed up by rubbing the
body with hands for a few more days till the elephants gets accustomed to
touching. Feeding by hand plantains, sugarcane and jaggery to the captive
wm accelerate the process of taming of the captive. The Mahout should
then sit over the back of the captive with two kumkis one on either side and
rub the body of the captive till the captive gets accustomed to the Mahout
sitting on its back. After some days, the Mahouts should sit on the back of
the captive keeping kumkis on either side and march it to water. Thereafter,
the captive must be made to learn to obey orders, to turn right and left, to
kneel, to lie down on, either side, to move backward and forward, to lift its
trunk and to pick up a stick and so on. The words of command could be in
local language and the Mahouts and Kothals should learn them fairly well.
The commands should generally be divided into 3 progressive stages in the
order of their simplicity and the, captive should be taught them in the order
given. Thus a captive should not be allowed to go on to the second or third
stage until it thoroughly knows and obeys the commands in the first and the
second stages. A captive which displays temper or sulks during its lesson
should be immediately hobbled and tethered and the training discontinued
for some time, so that the animal may recover from its temper and not feel
harassed. Feeding with sugarcane, jaggery and plantains on a command
being obeyed and kind treatment of the animal will help a great deal in
training captive. Merciless beating and teasing of the captive, by the
Mahouts should never be allowed. A captive may have to be told repeatedly what to do. The Mahout should be patient enough to bear with whatever progress the captive shows in learning- and see that a thorough
training is given however slow it may be. The Elephant Jamedar should
hold an examination for every captive to test its progress and steadiness.
The test should be strict and each animal to pass it will have to. (i) obey an order at once and without noise;
(ii) remain at that order until another is given; and
(iii) take up a correct position in every way for each order.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(3) The elephants should be trained to lift up logs or poles by means of
their trunks or tusks and to load them into vehicles. They should also be
trained to remain quiet to the sound of tom-tom, sound of firing from the
back, passing of carts, motor vehicles, bullocks and men, getting strangers
on and off their backs and to be tied to each other as a preliminary training
for elephant capturing operations.
(4) The Jamedar and Mahout in-chare of the elephant are both responsible
for the proper training of the new captives.
90-A. Sale of Elephants.- Elephants surplus of the Departmental requirement should be sold in Public auction. Rules for the sale of Departmental elephants are contained in Chapter XII of the Karnataka Forest
Rules, 1969. For all auction sales of departmental elephants, the
notification of sale prescribed for the purpose should be adopted and the
sale conditions contained therein should be adhered to. The elephants to
be sold should be assembled at a central place preferably near a river
where there is good water supply and-plenty of fodder. It is desirable to
give them at least a week's rest before the sale, to pick up condition. They
should be made to fall in at the place of sale so that the intending
purchasers may inspect them. To prevent the animals from running away,
they should be hobbled and the leg chains should on all such occasions, be
allowed to trial on the ground. The Mahouts or the Kothals should always
be near their animals and are fully watch them. It. is desirable to supply cut
fodder to the elephants when they are on parade. On the day of sale, they
should be stationed near the sale ring in serial order after washing and
feeding to be led for sale by turns. "
91. Maintenance of Service Registers of Elephants.-(1) Each elephant
should be given a name and its age, sex and height should be recorded. A
separate Service Register should be maintained in the Range Forest Office
to show the history of each elephant The Service Register should contain
the following information.
(i) Name of the elephant
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ii) Sex
(iii) Age
(iv) Height at shoulder (To be recorded every year during April and
dated).
(v) Date of acquisition
(vi) How obtained
(vii) Marks of identification, if any,
(viii) Length of tusks (To be recorded every year during April and
dated).
N.B.- The length should be measured from the gum point to the tip of the
tusk along the outer curvature.
(ix) Girth of the tusks (To be recorded every year during April and
dated).
N.B.- The girth measurements should be made at the gum point.
(x) Estimated value
(xi) Sanctioned daily scale of rations
(xii) Training
(xiii) Temperament
(xiv) The names of Mahouts and Kothals on the animal from time to
time.
(xv) Posting of elephant
(xvi) Working capacity
(xvii) Record of work turned out each month
(xviii) Ailments and prescriptions
(xix) Special rations prescribed
(xx) Accoutrements supplied
(xxi) Cost of maintenance
(xxii) Remarks of the Range Forest Officers and Veterinary
Inspectors
(xxiii) Remarks of the Divisional Forest Officer, Conservator of
Forests
and the Chief Conservator of Forests.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

N.B.- Sufficient number of pages for each item of information should be
provided.
(2) The elephant's Service Register should always be kept up-to-date by
making necessary ,entries therein from time to time, then and there. They
should be produced before' the Inspecting Officers whenever they visit the
camp.
(3)When an elephant is transferred from one Range or Division to another,
an entry of transfer quoting the authority should be made in this register
and the register also transferred to the Range Forest Officer concerned,
along with the elephant.
92. Selection of Elephant Camp Site.- Camps should always be selected
on high and well-drained ground, level at the surface, close to a river or
stream where plenty of good water and fodder are available so that they
may have good feed and water. Care should be taken to avoid establishing
an elephant camp in a swampy .or marshy place. It is essential to see that
camps are selected as far as possible, very near the working spots. Sheds
should be provided for storing elephant ration provisions, elephant accoutrements/ for cooking food for elephants and for the, elephant subordinate
to live in. Cooking shed should be erected in the centre of the camp with
sufficient space all round, So that the elephants can move freely. A strong
fence of 12 to 15 decimeters high, constructed with stout posts fixed at
intervals of 3 meters with crossbars tied to the posts should be erected
around the kitchen shed, 41/2 meters away from it, in order to prevent the
elephants, especially the young ones, from approaching the food table and
to make them 'fall in' behind the fence while feeding. Other sheds should
be a little distance away from the camp and on one side of it. The Mahouts
and Kothals should reside in the sheds provided for them near the camp.
93. Pasturage of Elephants.- The natural food of elephants is grass and
bamboos almost exclusively, although leaves of some kinds are broused.
Hence it is very essential they should be stationed where there are facilities
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

for good fodder, The elephants should be let out for grazing after the evening feed is over. To prevent animals from running away, they must invariably be hobbled when allowed to feed in the forest or on any occasion
when the Mahout is off the animal while in the forest. The trailing chain, on
such occasions, will be allowed to trail along the ground. Every elephant
should have a bell tied round its neck for various reasons. Bells will be of
great use to trace the animals when grazing in the forest or to trace them
when they bolt away. The Mahout or Kothals, who take the elephants for
leaving them for grazing in the forest, should see that they are taken to a
good grazing ground instead of leaving them dose by the camp where
there may be little or no fodder. They should not be allowed to be left near
villages, paddy fields, sugarcane gardens, etc. While leaving the elephants
to graze in the forest, the subordinate in-charge should see that the hooks
of the hobbles and trailing chains are properly secured to prevent them
from slipping and getting loose.
94. Feeding (1) Elephants feed both day and night. In order to keep them
in good condition, plenty of good food is quite essential. In captivity, half the
time of departmental elephants is spent on work and during that time they
are deprived of their natural fodder, while the loss of energy during work is
also very considerable. In order to compensate the loss of energy resulting
from work, concentrated and easily digestible food such as paddy or rice,
ragi and horse-gram are given. The food should be free from all mouldy
and insect-eaten grains and also, free from, sand, gravel, stone, etc. They
should be fed twice a day both morning and evening in the prescribed
sca1e;the diet and its scale varying according to the size and condition of
the animal. The prescribed scale of food may be fed either raw or cooked
according to the custom of the elephants. Every elephant should be fed
with salt daily, as prescribed according to the size of the elephant, along
with its food Jaggary in the prescribed scale should also be fed along with
the food. The best times for feeding are half an hour before work in the
morning and soon after bathing in the evening. The Divisional Forest Officer may, however, fix the actual time of-feeding in consultation with the
Veterinary doctor. Every day feeding should be taken up at the exact time
prescribed so that any Inspecting Officer desirous of the quantity produced
for feeding could verify the same. A ration-chart showing the rations preCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

scribed for each elephant should be written up and displayed in a prominent place in each camp to facilitate checking.
(2) Where cooked food is given, it should be well boiled preferably in iron or
aluminium vessels. If copper vessels are to be used, care should be taken
to coat the inside of the vessel with tin periodically. The cooking shed
should always be kept clean and tidy. Necessary portable table, 300 cm X
120 cm may be kept in the shed for spreading the boiled food for cooling
and then for moulding the food. When the boiled food is spread on the
table, the attendant should see that flies do not settle on the food and
contaminate it. After the food is cooled, it is then moulded to facilitate
d1ecking and correct issue of articles of food.. Two sets of moulds of
specific dimensions for moulding cooked ragi flour and gram separately
should be kept in each camp. The dimensions of the moulds should be
such as to prepare cakes out of 500 grammes of ragi Hour or 500 grammes
of horsegram. Thus, for example, if an elephant is prescribed a ration
consistingof 4 kilograms of ragi flour and 3 kilograms of horsegram, 8 ragi
cakes and 6 gram cakes will have to be fed to it. Gram should be boiled
and pounded well in a wooden pestle and mortar and then moulded. Ragi
flour should be boiled uniformly well and then moulded. For purposes of account raw provisions are weighed and issued. The prescribed diet should
then be arranged for each elephant separately and covered with food
covers to prevent flies from settling on it. Food should be prepared and
kept ready at least one hour before the time of feeding to facilitate cooling
and check by the Officers. Food should always be given only when it is
cooled and on no account should it be given hot. After the feeding is over,
the cooking utensils, food table moulds, etc., should be removed and
cleaned thoroughly.
(3) Sick elephants should be fed with special rations as prescribed by the
Veterinary Inspector in-charge of the elephants.
(4) Paddy straw in the prescribed scale should be supp1iedduring hot
months from 1st February to 30th June to elephants that are fed with raw
food only.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(5) Branch fodder should be supplied to the Departmental elephants when
elephants are stationed in cities and towns where pasturage is not easily
available. The supply should be made in the prescribed scale under special
orders of the Divisional Forest Officer.
(6) Castor oil should be applied to the head of the elephant daily in the
prescribed scale. Castor oil should also be supplied to each working elephant in the prescribed scale for application to elephant collars ,and other
leather parts of the gear to keep them soft during the working season.
(7) During the non-working season, the food rations should be reduced by
half.
(8) The Forester or Jamedar in charge of the elephants should see that the
elephants are fed in his presence in the prescribed scale. The Range
Forest Officer should give surprise visits at least once in a fortnight to the
elephant camp at feeding hours .to inspect that the elephants are properly
fed and in time.
(9) The scale of rations prescribed fur the Departmental elephants will be
according to the tabular statement annexed in this Chapter.
SCALE OF RATIONSPRESOUBED FOR DEPARTMENTAL
ELEPHANTS [See Rule 94(g)]
Age

Height

1

2

Upto

Ragi Horse
Flour Gram
Per
Per
Day
Day
3
4
Kg.
Kg.
1
1

Rice
Per
day
5
Kg.
2

Paddy Coco- Coco- Jaggery
Per
nut
nut
Per
day
Oil
Per
Day
day
6
7
8
9
Kg.
Ml.
Gm
200
1
250

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

one
year
of Age
Above
one
year
-do-do-

-do-

-do-

Upto
180
cm.
Upto
215
cm.
Above
215
cm. –
upto
245
cm.
Above
245
cm. –
upto
275
cm.
Above
275
cm.

Age

1
Upto one

3

2

4

-

400

1

500

4

3

-

6

600

-

250

6

6

-

-

600

-

250

7

7

-

10

600

-

250

8

8

-

12

600

-

250

Height

Salt
per
day

Castor Oil

10

11

For
applicatio
n to collar,
etc. per
week
12
13

Gm.

Ml.

Lts.

Kg.

Kg.

25

25

-

5

100

2

For Head
applicatio
n per day

Paddy
straw
per day

Branc
h
fodde
r per
day
14

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

year of
age
Above
one year
-do-

-do-

-do-

-do-

Upto 180
cm.
Above
180 cm.
upto 215
cm.
Above
215 cm.
upto 245
cm.
Above
245 cm.
upto 275
cm.
Above
275 cm.

50

50

-

10

200

150

100

0.5

15

300

150

100

0.5

20

400

150

100

0.5

25

450

150

100

0.5

30

500

N.B. (1) Ragi flour and horsegram are to be fed cooked and rice and paddy are
to be fed raw. Either of the two is to be prescribed for each elephant and
not both.
(2) Coconut oil is to be administered along with food once in four days only
cases where cooked ragi and gram feed is prescribed.
(3) Prescribed number of coconuts are to be fed only in cases of feeding of
raw and uncooked food.
(4) Half a litre of castor oil supplied per week for application 10 collar, etc.,
should be applied to the articles on the weekly holiday.
(5) Paddy straw is to be supplied only from 1st February to 30th June and,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

that too, only for the animals fed with raw food.
(6) Fodder will be supplied only when the elephants are stationed in cities
and towns where pasture is not easily available.
95. Watering and Bathing of Elephants.- Elephants must be watered at
one spot and bathed in another. The watering place m1ist always be higher
up in the stream than the bathing place. To prevent .animals from drinking
at bathing places while being washed, they must invariably be watered at
the drinking place immediately before they are bathed. The supply of good
drinking water, preferably from a running stream, is quite essential as all
parasitic diseases and many other ailments are water-borne. They should
be watered and bathed only after a lapse of half an hour after hard work as
the system of the animal is then overheated. This is necessary to allow the
body temperature to come down to normal and to guard against the
possibility of animals catching cold, etc. The elephants should be bathed
twice a day, i.e., once in the morning before the commencement of work
and once in the evening after work. While bathing, the body should be
scrubbed well by the attendants with soft stones, or coconut fibre or
preferably with matured fruits of Pandanus odorotissimus cut into proper
sizes. Washing and grooming improve their condition and impart a dark
velvety appearance to the skin which is one of the signs of good health.
Bath should be given at least for one hour both morning and evening. No
elephant should be bathed if it appears to be ill. The dung deposited by the
animal at the time of bathing should not be allowed to float on the water. It
should be collected and thrown on to the bank of the stream.
96. Sanitation.- The dung in the elephant camp should be collected and
removed twice a day-once in the morning and; once' in the evening and
deposited in a pit 50 meters away from the camp to prevent multiplication
of worms at the camp site. When one pit is filled completely, a new one
may be dug for use and the old one covered with earth or the dung-heap
burnt when dry.
97. Supply of Rations.-(1) Supply of rations to departmental elephants
should be made by the tender contractor. Tenders should be called for by
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the Divisional Forest Officer for the supply of rations in November each
year for supply during the ensuing calendar year. The contract shall run
from 1st January or from the date of execution of the agreement by the
successful tenderer whichever is later upto 31st December~ The contractor
is further bound to supply the .rations, if required, for a further period i.e., till
the fresh contract is finalised. In cases of emergency or where the tender
contractor fails to supply the rations, the Divisional Forest Officer may
permit the Range Forest Officer 10 make direct purchases under appropriate sanctions.
(2) The articles of rations supplied by the contractor or purchased directly
should be taken to stock and proper accounts maintained of their receipts,
issues and balance, by the Range Forest Officer. When the supply is made
by a contractor, he should be required to supply the entire requirements for
have months in the first instance, and thereafter regularly every month on
or before a specified date. The contractor should be issued a proper
acknowledgement for the quantity and quality of each article or rations
supplied. The contractor's bill for supply should always be accompanied
with the acknowledgements obtained by him. When purchases are made
directly by the Range Forest Officer, the entire stock should remain in his
charge, only supplying there from the quantity required of each article of
action for one or two months at a time to the subordinate in charge of the
elephant on the latter's indent. When the supply is made by the contractor,
he may be required to supply the rations to the subordinate in-charge of the
elephant on directions from R.F.O. and to obtain his acknowledgement
therefor. On no account should the subordinate in charge of the elephant
be allowed to make direct purchases, and this should be done only by the
Range Forest Officer. The contractor should deliver the rations at the elephant camp at his own cost and obtain the acknowledgement.
(3) The Forester should maintain a daily running account of the receipts,
issues and balances of all provisions in Form 13.
(4) The Range Forest Officer should make surprise inspections at least
once in a fortnight to verify the stock on hand and to see if the receipts and
issues are properly accounted for. The daily issues should be based on the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

scale sanctioned, and in respect of special rations, in the scale as
prescribed by the Veterinary Inspector. All sanctions of specia1 rations on
the advice of the Veterinary Inspector should be communicated to the
Forester in charge. Stocks and registers shall be subject to check by the
Divisional Forest Officer at any time.
Record of Cost of feed of elephants
(5) The Range Forest Officer shall maintain a register in Form 14 showing
therein the quantity of each description of provisions issued for the feed
and maintenance of elephants together with their cost and submit a copy of
it to the Divisional Forest Officer in the ensuring month.
98. Work of Elephants.- (1) Elephants are not full grown till they are 25
years old. If carefully worked under proper care, a good elephant will be
able to do hard work for 30 years and if the work is then moderated, it will
work for another 20 years. Elephants of 25 years and above are fit for hard
work. From 20 to 25 years of age, they should be given moderately hard
work and between 15 and 20, only light work. At the age of 15, elephants
may be put on dragging poles only for about 3 hours a day. Elephants
below 15 years of age should not be allotted any regular work. But may be
given light work such as carrying fodder or baggage, sufficient to keep
them exercised and accustomed.
(2) It is difficult to Jay down hard and fast rules as to the amount of work
that may 'be extracted from elephants: It depends upon their age, constitution, condition of health nature of work and the nature of the terrain over
which logs have to be dragged. This can only be ascertained by careful
observation from those in attendance at the time of work.
(3) Elephants can be safely worked for 6 hours a day preferably during the
cooler hours. Great care should be taken not to overwork the animals at
any time.
(4) 'Harness' method may be adopted for dragging of timber by elephants.
While dragging is in progress, obstructions, if any, in the path should be
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

cleared to avoid unnecessary delay and loss of energy to the elephant. A
few minutes rest must be given after the elephants have dragged a log.
While dragging timber. especially uphill, the animals will stop of their own
accord every 10 or 15 meters and they should not be forced to go on
further immediately. When they have to extricate a log from a difficult
position, it should be done with utmost care. Great care should be taken
not to waste the elephant power in handling small logs, poles and other
materials which could be more economically handled by manual labour.
Special care should also be taken while employing tuskers for lifting or
rolling big logs beyond their capacity as a little carelessness in this respect
may cause breakage of tusks.
(5) New captives should be given light work 3 hours a day for at least one
year, even though they are a workable age and the work gradually
increased thereafter.
(6) Before the commencement of the elephant working season. the Range
Forest Officer should prepare a detailed programme of timber dragging
work in his. Range showing the number of elephants required for the purpose, the period during which they ace required at different centres of work,
the elephant camps to be established. for the purpose and get it approved
by the Divisional Forest Officer.
(7) The Range Forest Officer should provide the Forester or Guard in
charge of timber dragging work, a monthly work table showing dearly the
work he has to execute expressed in tonne-kilometers during the month.
He will also be instructed regarding the capacity of each elephant, similarly
expressed in tonne-kilometers. The Forester or Guard and the Mahout shall
then be responsible not only for the adequate outtum of work but also for
the proper care of the animals until the work for the day is closed.
(8) When the work for the day is finished, the Forester or Guard in charge
of the timber dragging work should measure the work and record the work
done by each animal on that day. For this purpose, he will note the cubical
contents of the logs in cubic metres transported from one place to another
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

by each animal and multiply that quantity by the average load for the day's
working in kilometers between the two places and divided by 1.50 (1.50
cubic metres=l tonne). The result will be tonne-kilometers and it should be
recorded in the 'Register of work performed by elephants' at the end of
each day.
Illustration.- If the dragging capacity of a particular elephant for 800
meters on the level ground is prescribed as 4 cubic metres approximately
or 2.8 metric tonnes, its capacity is equivalent to 2.2 tonne-kilometers per
day of six hour working.
(9) The capacity will vary with the nature of the terrain and the weather
conditions at the time. An average, therefore, should be fixed in consideration of the season and the nature of the terrain. The work actually turned
out should be calculated on the lines illustrated above and reasons be
noted where the actual outturn falls short of the capacity of the animals.
(10) The register of daily work performed by elephants should be entered
as prescribed in Form 15.
(11) An abstract of the entries in the register must be made at the end of
each week by the Forester or Guard in charge of elephant dragging work in
Form 16 and submitted to the Range Forest Officer to enable him to watch
the progress and to prepare a monthly return of the 'Work turned out by
elephants' for submission to the Divisional Forest Officer. The monthly
return of the 'Work turned out by elephants' should be in Form 17. The
Divisional Forest Officers and the Range Forest Officers should maintain
this register, the former Officers consolidating the entries in their registers
from the returns furnished by the Range Forest Officers.
99. Cost of Maintenance and value of Work turned out.- The cost of
maintaining each elephant and the value of the work turned out by it shall
be entered in a register in Form 18. This register should be maintained both
in the 'Range Forest Office as well as in the Divisional Forest Office. The
entries in this register shall be based on the figures contained in the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

'Record of feed and keep of elephants' the Record of work turned. out of
elephant in Form 14. In addition, it should contain the cost of attendants
and any other expenditure incurred for the maintenance, treatment, etc., of
each elephant, as well as the value of work turned out.
100. Marching of Elephants.- (1) Marching of elephants from one camp to
another should be made only during cool hours, preferably in the mornings.
Marches should be completed by 11 a.m. at the latest in hot seasons and
by 12-30 p.m. during other seasons. Marching distance for a laden
elephant should not exceed 20 kilometers per day. If longer marches are
required to be done, .the elephants should be halted on the way at places
where there is sufficient water and fodder. For every 3 days march, 1 day's
rest should be given. Whenever young elephants are marched, from place
to place, they should not be marched more than 10 kilometers at a stretch.
While loading elephants or marching or riding; they should not be made to
sit for a long time; but the loading or mounting should be done as quickly as
possible. After loading, they should not be allowed to stand about unnecessarily as they feel this very fatiguing. As soon as they are loaded, they
should start off. After reaching the destination, they should be unloaded as
quickly as possible. The load for a mature elephant should not exceed five
quintals, including persons mounted. The Range Forest Officer; should invariably intimate the concerned Veterinary Inspectors, the shifting of
elephant camps.
(2) The elephants should never be allowed to remain loaded for more than
4 to 5 hours in a day. Any stream or river found on the route of marching
should be made use of for watering and this will greatly refresh the animals
and they feel less tired. When a batch of elephants are marched the fastest
animal should be placed in front, so that the others may follow with
sufficient speed. When elephants are halted on the roadside during a
march, they should be kept a little away from the road. Necessary First Aid
medicines such as, Tincture, Iodine, diarrhoea mixture or pills dressing
cotton, etc., should always be taken during the march. If there is scarcity of
fodder enroute, the Kothals should collect branch fodder and feed the elephants during the progress of marching.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(3) Elephants should not be allowed to walk on Forest roads especially fair
weather roads, during monsoons, as they spoil the surface of the roads.
They must be made to walk in the forest on the sides of the roads and not
on them.
101. Rest and recess season for elephants.- In order to keep the elephants in good condition, it is necessary that they are given periodical rest
of 3 to 4 months in a year. They should also be given a day's rest in each
week preferably on Sundays. During the rest period, all the elephants
should be shifted to an elephant camp where plenty of water and good
fodder, etc. are available, so that they may have good feed and water and
thereby pick up health and be fit for heavy work for the next season. The
Divisional Forest Officer shall fix the elephant camps for stationing the
elephants during rest season.
102. Signs of Health.- A healthy elephant constantly swings its trunk and
tail, flaps its ear lobes, sways the body or the head from side to side and
swings its legs frequently rubbing one leg against the opposite. The skin
should be soft, almost black in colour and the bristles covering the body
firm to the touch; the mucous membrane of the mouth should be rich pink
in colour, the eyes clear and bright, and the coloured blotches and spots on
the head and trunk pinkish in colour. A moist secretion should exude from
around and above 1he nails. The appetite should be good and the animal
should sleep for a few hours-every night and immediately on waking
commence to feed.
103. Signs of Indisposition.- (1) An indisposed elephant is listless; there
is general langour and absence of the constant motion so characteristic of
a healthy animal. The skin appears greyish in colour, hangs loosely and is
dry and sometimes scaly; the spots and blotches also assume this pale
colour. The trunk presents a shrivelled appearance. The colour of the mucous membrane in the mouth and that of the tongue changes to a muddy
colour or is deep red with or without blotches on the palate. The lower lap
of the ear is often cold to the touch. The eyes are dull, appear retracted and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

there is frequently an abnormal flow of water from the eyes. The animal
may lie down and get up several times. The urination is often reduced in
quantity and the urine becomes highly coloured. The dung becomes hard
and often coated with Mucous. Male elephants on attaining maturity get
periodical paroxysms of excitement called 'Musth'. Elephants in 'Musth'
become unruly and dangerous 10 men and other male elephants. They develop short temper and disobey commands. They give up feeding and resort to it only occasionally: They will be dripping urine constantly. The
temples become swollen on either side and later on -there will be oily
exudation from the temples. During the musth period, the elephant should
be tied up and treated till it regains normalcy.
(2) Signs and bad temper or anger.-The elephant throws forward its earlobes and keeps off flapping them, exhibits blood-shot eyes, straightens its
tail and twists it, curls its trunk and sometimes puts it into its mouth and
resents commands. When the above signs are noticed, the elephant should
not be disturbed, maltreated or forced to obey commands. Instead, it
should be kept calm, and handled tactfully and. gently. Feeding with
Jaggery and sugarcane will help to bring down the bad temper of the
elephant.
104. Diseases and Treatment of Elephants.- (l) Common ailments and
diseases of elephants are galls, wounds, abscess, colic, indigestion, diarrhoea, worm infection, mud-sores, musth, anthrox, foot and mouth disease,
etc.
(2) When an elephant falls sick, the Mahout in-charge ofiJal11edar or
Forester in charge, if possible, in writing, in the absence of the Jamedar or
Forester to the local Range Forest Officer, who will immediately indent
upon the services of the Veterinary Inspector in-charge of the elephants if
the sickness is of a serious nature- The Veterinary Inspector in-charge of
elephants should, on receipt of such intimation, proceed to the Spot forth
with and treat the sick animal. The Range Forest Officer may, in cases,
where immediate relief is required and where the Veterinary Inspector in
charge of elephants is not readily available, indent and obtain the services
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

of the local Veterinary Inspector. If the sickness of the elephant is of an
ordinary nature, the Jamedar. or the Mahout should attend to the treatment
himself. The Divisional Forest Officer should be kept duly informed by the
local Range Forest Officer of -the action taken by him.
(3) No sick elephant should be put to work until certified as fit for work by
the Veterinary Inspector in charge of elephants..
(4) Common drugs, required for treating sick elephants should be kept in
stock by the Veterinary Inspector in-charge of elephants. A medicine chest
with sufficient stock of medicines for First-Aid should always be with the
Jamedar or Forester in-charge of elephants and he should be provided, by
the Veterinary Inspector in-charge of elephants, with a pamphlet on the
care and treatment of sick elephants containing instructions.
(5) Elephants suffering from diarrhoea, worm- infection and other contagious diseases should be kept separately-in the camp. Sick elephants
should be given sick-diet and medicines prescribed by-the Veterinary
Inspector. The subordinates in-charge of elephants should be on the alert
to gather information about the outbreak of any contagious disease among
cattle in the surrounding area and inform the authorities concerned
immediately about it.
105. Care of Pregnant Elephants.- A Pregnant elephant should not be
given heavy work and 3 gradual reduction of work should be made and
complete rest given when the animal finds difficulty to do any work as
heavy work may cause abortion. Constipating diets should be avoided and
easily digestible food as prescribed by the Veterinary Inspector should be
given. After calving, tender coconuts 6 10 8 in number may be fed to the
mother to increase milk supply to the calf. She may be given light work six
months after delivery. When light work is given care should be taken that
the girth rope does not injure the mammary glands. Young calves should
not be weaned before they attain one year and after weaning they should
be sent to a separate camp and their training should commence
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

immediately they are weaned.
[106. Health Register.-(1) A register containing a daily record of elephants
thrown out of work owing to sickness or other causes must be maintained
by the Veterinary Inspector in-charge of elephants in which treatment given
to them must be detailed.
(2) The Veterinary Inspector-in-charge of elephants should send a fortnightly report on the health of the elephants to the Range Forest Officer,
the Divisional Forest Officer and the Conservator of Forests. Similar reports
should be sent to the Chief Conservator of Forests every quarter. The
report should be in Form 19.
107. Death of Elephant.- When an elephant dies, a post-mortem examination should invariably be conducted by the Veterinary Inspector and the
body burried 3.5 meters deep after extracting the tusks, if any; The death of
elephants should be reported to the Chief Conservator of Forests by the
Divisional Forest Officer and by the Chief Conservator of Forests to the
Government. The Veterinary Inspector should submit a report to the Conservator of Forests and the Divisional Forests Officer his findings on the
post-mortem examination, in the proforma prescribed inform 20.
108. Elephant Accoutrements.-(1) Every working elephant should be
provided with the following accoutrements.
(i) Gadi.-One-(Size depending upon the size of the elephant);
(ii) Namda big (GadeIa).-One-(Size depending upon the size of the
elephant);
(iii) Kati Namda.-One;
(iv) Katis (Prepared out of seasoned Matti Wood of standard size) two;
(v) Bell with chain.-One;
(vi) Collar (Mysore type).-One;
(vii) Hobbles (16 millimeters links standard).-One;
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(viii) Dumchi.-One.
(ix) Dragging chains (10.75 meters long and 16 millimeters links). Two.
(x) Tethering chain (6.5 meters long and 12 millimeters links).One.
(xi) Trailing chain (Two meters long).-Two.
(xii) Bucket.-One.
(xiii) Empty gunny bags for storing rations.- Two.
(xiv) Hemp for making ropes.-28 Kg. each.
(xv) Utensils for cooking food, moulds, containers etc. (where
cooked food is fed).-Required number.
(2) The Mahout should be provided with one bill-hook and the Kothal
should be provided with a bill-hook.
(3) Spare chains, collars, ropes and katis should be stocked at a central
place to supply readily in times of need.
(4) The supply of accoutrements should be obtained by inviting tenders
each year. All accoutrements should be taken to stock in the "Register of
Stores, tools, and plant". All unserviceable articles of accoutrements, if they
are beyond repairs, should be auctioned every year after the supply of new
accoutrements, with the previous sanction of the Divisional Forest Officer.
(5) Namdas should be well stuffed with coconut fibres and gadi with grass
or straw and always kept in good condition for use to prevent injuries to the
back of elephants. All leather parts of gear should be oiled well and kept
soft. Ropes used should be soft and devoid of knots. The Mahout in-charge
of elephant should daily inspect the hobbles and trailing chains and get the
weak links repaired. The Range Forest Officer should arrange for the
repairs and replacements of, broken or damaged accoutrements
immediately they are reported to him.
109. Distribution of Elephants and Control.- Distribution of elephants for
work among the Divisions within a Circle will be made by the Conservator
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

of Forests and distribution to circles will be made by the Chief Conservator
of Forests. The Divisional Forest Officer is responsible for the maintenance
and proper extraction of work from the elephants allotted to his Division.
110. Elephant Establishment.- Each working elephant shall have two
attendants one called a Mahut and the other called Kothal (Cavadi) These
are appointed by the Divisional Forest Officer. As far as possible, the attendants appointed for each elephant should not be changed frequently. An
elephant Jamedar or a Forester is appointed in each Division or group of
Divisions, as the case may be where large number of elephants are stationed. In Circles where large numbers of elephants are permanently stationed a veterinary Inspector will be appointed for the medical treatment of
Departmental elephants.
111. Details regarding various types of capture of elephants are given in
Appendix VI.
CHAPTER III
Duties and responsibilities of the forest Officers and office business
112. General - (a) The duty of the Forest Officer is to manage the forests
under his control consistent with the objects of managements, in each
Case. He has to attend to various works connected with the protection and
improvement of the forests, propagation of trees and production of forest
produce in demand as well as with their utilisation and marketing.
(b) In order to tackle to the best advantage, the forests under his charge,
he has, consequently, a wide range of work He must have a thorough
knowledge of the climatic, edaphic and biotic factors influencing the practice of forestry, the distributi0n of forests and their classification and type.
He must be able to identify me different kinds of trees in his forests, and
must know the uses to which each can be put and the localities to which
they are best adapted. He must be able to survey and assess the area and
to determine the amount and value of timber or other forest produce on it.
He must be able to draw up plans for protecting the forests from fire and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

carry out the details involved in their execution. He must know to control
the attacks by insects and fungi, to fight forest fires, to prevent and control
smuggling of timber and other forest produce and how many cattle any
particular forest will support and how their grazing should be controlled. He
must be able to manage forest nurseries and know how to plant trees and
when, and how to sow seeds and when and where one is preferable to the
other. He must know how to carry out thinnings. He must be able to
determine the rate of growth of trees, the age at which they should be cut
and to make plans for harvesting and reproducing them. He must be able
to draw up a working plan providing in detail for the proper management of
the entire forest.
(c) He must know what wild animals and birds are available, how they
should be protected and what laws and rules govern the shooting or capturing of wild animals and birds. He should have a fair knowledge of the
mineral wealth of the area; and the mining laws to deal intelligently with the
Prospectors and Miners. He must have a fair knowledge of the care and
maintenance of livestock. He must have a fair knowledge of Engineering to
enable him to align and form new roads, to construct simple bridges, culverts, causeways, etc., and to plan and construct buildings.
(d) He must be a good businessman with a sound knowledge of the market
conditions to enable him to dispose of the yield from his forest to the best
advantage. He must be highly tactful and disciplined in dealing with the
subordinates, contractors, privilege-holders and other persons coming in
official contact with him. He must be in a position to maintain a correct
account of not only works, in execution under his charge, but also of the
revenue he has to realise and of the expenditure he has to incur.
(e) He must be well conversant with the Forest Act and Rules and their
correct interpretations and have a good knowledge of office procedure and
accounting in the Forest Department. He must be fit to enable him to spend
the bulk of his time in the forests, controlling, supervising or inspecting
forest works. Above all, he must have initiative, drive, sense of discipline,
dedication to duty, honesty and integrity.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

113. Duties of the Chief Conservator of Forests (General) and Special
Chief Conservator of Forests (Development).- (a) Chief Conservator of
Forests (General) is the administrative Head of the Department directing
the affairs of the Department. All correspondence of the Department addressed to the Government shall either pass through him or emanate from
his office. He will communicate directly and personally with Government
whenever he considers it necessary to do so. He will address Government
officially on questions affecting matters of policy and on any technical
matter which he may desire to bring to the notice of Government. He is the
principal technical and professional adviser to Government on forest matters. He is responsible for carrying out and implementing the forest policy
as laid down by the Government. It is his duty to make recommendations to
Government regarding postings, transfers and promotions of officers of
Class I rank.
(b) The Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Development) is empowered
to deal on his own authority with professional questions such as Working
Plans, and silvicultural operations generally and with such other matters
regarding which powers have been delegated to him. He will guide
preparation of Working Plans, deal finally with all preliminary Working Plan
reports, sanction working schemes for forests not covered by Working
Plans, sanction deviations from the prescriptions of working plans, submit
completed working plans to Government for sanction and control the execution of sanctioned working plans.
(c) Chief Conservator of Forests (General) will control sales and supplies of
timber and other forest produce, guide forest research and find new
markets for forest produce. He will keep constant liaison with Forest Research and Forest industries.
(d) Chief Conservator of Forests (General) is responsible for the successful
implementation of the Plan schemes of the Department and for their
evaluation. The Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Dev.) is responsible
for plan schemes concerning his wing such as Rubber, Cocoa, Spices, Resources survey, etc.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(e) Chief Conservator of Forests (General) will consolidate the budget and
appropriation proposals of the Department for the consideration of
Government and the sanction of the Legislature. He will generally supervise over the expenditure and revenue of the Department and regulate it in
such a way that the allotted revenue is made up and the allotted budget
grants are fully spent with as little fluctuations as possible.
(f) Both the 01ief Conservators of Forests will make frequent tours of
inspection in the forests. During these inspection tours, they will inspect
important forest works, see that the several forest operations are being
carried out according to plan, examine the adequacy or otherwise of the
protective measures and assess the work of officers and subordinates, the
discipline and control maintained by them and the knowledge and experience gained by them. They will conduct detailed inspection in one Division
in each Circle once in a year. In the course of these detailed inspections,
the following points should receive their particular attention.
(i) Surveys and settlement made or in progress, and their cost extent
to which they are still required; nature and adequacy of the maps and
settlement records prepared;
(ii) Working plans, already made or in progress, and their cost, extent
to which plans are still required, results of working of plans in force,
maintenance of Control journals, Control books, Record (If works and
Control maps, de.;
(iii) Forest boundaries, their nature, condition and state of repair;
demarcation works in progress and their cost; demarcation work still
to be done;
(iv) Controlling, Executive and protective staffs, its efficiency, state
of discipline, its adequacy, etc;
(v) Roads, buildings and other similar works in existence or under
construction, their cost, state. of repairs, new roads, buildings or other
works required; .
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(vi) Conditions of the Forests, the method of treatment employed,
natural regeneration, causes interfering with it, etc.;
(vii) Protection of forests from injury, by man, cattle, fire, insects, fungi
and other causes; the adequacy or otherwise of the steps taken; their
frequency and causes;
(viii) Works of regeneration and cultural improvements. extent, condition and cost of plantations made condition of nurseries; new
sowings and plantings required; weedings cleanings, thinnings and
other cultural operations, extent to which carried on and required;
(ix) Method of working and management in force, advantages or
otherwise of these methods, expenditure incurred on them, out turn of
the forests, and financial results;
(x) Timber Depots, firewood depots, and sandalwood depots, their
situation and adequacy, condition in which kept state of records kept
up in connection with them, stock-position, discrepancies, if any, in
the stock;
(xi) Problems of soil erosion, the gravity of threat from - this cause
and its extent, adequacy or otherwise of the steps taken to prevent it;
(xii) Forest privileges and concessions existing, the extent to which
they have been availed of, to what extent they have been misused,
reasons, if any, for their curtailment, modification or cancellation;
(xiii) Seigniorage rates prevailing, their reasonableness or otherwise.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

enhancement or reduction, if any, required;
(xiv) Land problems, extent of forest lands granted for cultivation or
other purposes, Darkast application and disforestment proposals
pending finalization, availability and extent of Revenue lands for
taking over by the Department;
(xv) Forest resources, the occurrence of any particular forest produce
in abundance in the locality, its availability in economic quantities,
and its suitability to serve as raw material for forest based industries,
how best it could be utilised, scope for starting for est-based
industries;
(xvi) Enforcement of Forest Act and Rules, breach of rules their frequency and causes, adequacy or otherwise of the enforcement
machinery, necessity for amending any section of the Forest and
other concerned Acts or any of the Rules framed thereunder;
(xvii) Forest Revenue and Forest advances outstanding, the amount
and period over which they are outstanding, steps taken for their
recovery;
(xviii) Plantation Registers, Forest Journals and Forest Maps their
maintenance and posting them up-to-date;
(xix) Enforcement of Wildlife (Preservation) Act, Preservation of Wild
animals and Wild birds, breach of game wild life (Preservation) rule,
their frequency and cause, steps taken to prevent such breaches,
abundance or scarcity in the occurrence of any particu1ar game and
1he causes thereof, existence of any wild animal causing havoc to
crops, cattle and Man, ete,;
(xx) Village forests village woodlands, practice of farm-forestry and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

results. of Vanamahotsava, the enthusiasm of the Panchayats and
villagers in these matters, the Co-operation and technical advice
rendered by the Department and what further steps are required to
achieve better results.
(g) They will be mainly responsible for maintaining discipline among the
officers and subordinates in the Department and for establishing cordial
relationship with the other departments of Government.
(h) They may correspond directly with the Inspector General of Forests to
the Government of India on purely professional matters on which he may
require information or desire to make suggestions or to obtain advice.
114. Duties of the Conservators or Forests.- (a) They are the officers in
administrative .charge of Forest Circles and are responsible within their
respective areas, for 1he general direction and supervision of all forest
works, for the control of establishment, of expenditure, of advances for
works and of contracts, sales and supplies and for the general
management of forests within their charges.
(b) They are immediately subordinate to the Chief conservator of Forests
(General) or the Special Chief Conservator of Forests (Development) as
the case may be in all matters. They will obtain orders and instructions from
the Chief Conservator of Forests (General) or the Special Chief
Conservator of Forests (Development) on professional questions such as
working plans, Silvicultural operations, protection of forests and such other
matters.
(c) He should see that all money transactions are conducted in accordance
with the rules in force; and he should examine the cost of current works as
well as those which have been spread over several years.
(d) He should also ascertain that the Divisional Forest Officers and other
members of the controlling staff are conversant with their duties, that discipline is maintained and the forest works are properly supervised.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(e) He is responsible for the successful implementation of the Plan
Schemes within his Circle.
(f) He will regulate 1he budget allotment within his Circle and exercise
control over the expenditure,
(g) He will control the execution of sanctioned Working Plans.
(h) He will furnish .his opinion, when sought for, to the Working Plan
officers while drawing new Working Plans for forests in his circle.
(i) He will make tours of inspection, visiting every Division in his charge as
frequently as possible. During these inspection tours, he will particularly
inspect, important forest works, see that the several forest operations are
being carried out according to plan, examine the adequacy or otherwise of
the protective measures and assess the work of Range Forest Officers and
their subordinates and the discipline and control maintained by them.
(j) He will conduct detailed inspection once a year of each Division and
during the course of such detailed inspections, the several points that the
Chief Conservators of Forests is expected to give attention during similar
inspections, should also receive his particular attention.
115. Duties of Conservator of Forests, Working Plans and
Development- Conservator of Forests, Forest Research and Utilisation
and Conservator of Forest Wildlife. Preservation, Field Director, (project
Tiger).
(a) The Conservator of Forests, Working Plans, is responsible for
planning a phased programme for drawing new Working Plans for
forests not yet covered by Working Plans and for revising the
Working Plans of Forests, as and when they expire. He will see that
the programme is adhered to, to enable the Department to work the
forests always according to sanctioned Working Plans. He will
supervise over preparation of Working Plans, scrutinise preliminary
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

and final Working Plans, scrutinise preliminary and final working plan
reports, consult the Chief Conservators of Forests and the
Conservator of Forests in charge of territorial circles on any matter
relating to Working Plans and guide the drawing up of Working Plans
by the Divisional Forest Officers in charge of Working Plans.
He will frequently tour and inspect the progress of work, both in the
field as well as in office, of data collection and actual drawing up of
the plan. During his inspection tours, he ",-ill inspect the Divisional
Forest Offices to find out, if the prescriptions of the Working Plans are
carried out accordingly, if the deviation, if any, made have received
the sanction of the appropriate authority and if the prescribed Control
books, journals, Record of works and Control maps have been
posted up-to-date.
(b) The Conservator of Forests, Forest Research and Utilisation
Circle guide, control and supervise forest research in Siriculture,
Forest Utilisation and Soil Conservation. For that purpose, he will
keep himself abreast with the latest trends in Forestry research
utilisation of Forest products and developments in the Conservation
of soil and moisture. He will keep in close contact with other
institutions conducting research in Forestry and also with the Forest
based industrial concerns and co-ordinate research work at the
Departmental level. He shall act as a liaison Officer between the
Department and Forest Research Institutes on the one hand, and
with the Industrial enterprises utilising forest products as raw
materials on the other hand.
(c) The Conservator of Forests, Wildlife Preservation Bangalore, is
also the Chief Wildlife Warden for the Karnataka State as per Section
4 of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, and is responsible for
implementing and enforcing the Wildlife (Preservation) Act, 1972 and
the rules made thereunder. In addition he is the Wildlife adviser to the
Chief Conservator of Forests (General), and will deal with all the
National Parks and wild life sanctuaries.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(d) The Field Director, Project Tiger, Bandipur is responsible for
implementing the tiger project drawn and approved by the
Government of India, for preserving the existing tiger population, and
further increase its population.
116. Divisional Forest Officers.- (a) The Divisional Forest Officer is
responsible for the general management of the forests situated in his
Division, the administration of the Division under his charge, the execution
of all forest works in the Division and possesses direct control over the
forest, establishment employed therein.
(b) He exercises .a direct control over the Forest establishment in the
Division and it is his duty to see that the Executive, protective Ministerial
and other forest staff in the Division maintain discipline and to their duties
properly.
(c) He is immediately subordinate to the Conservator of Forests of the
Circle in all matters and will receive orders and instructions from him.
(d) He will arrange for regeneration, improvement, exploitation and
protection of forests according to sanctioned working plans, Working
schemes or annual plan of operations or other orders.
(e) He will conduct sales, enter into contracts and supply timber and other
forest produce to other Departments and to the public.
(f) He will realise the revenue allotted to his Division and control the
expenditure in the Division.
(g) He will deal finally with all forest offence cases in the Division.
(h) The Divisional Forest Officer shall conduct inspection of all forest works
in the division and check-measure works as prescribed in the Forest
Account Code, recording the result of such measurements in the 'MeasureCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

ment books or Field Note books maintained for the purpose. Wherever
there are Gazetted Assistants attached to the Divisional Forest Officer, he
may delegate his duties of inspection of Forest works and their checkmeasurements partly to his Gazetted Assistant.
(i) It shall also be the duty of the Divisional Forest Officer to see that Forest
and plantation journals, Control books and Control journals are posted upto-date. The Divisional Forest Officers should strictly adhere to the
provisions of the sanctioned Working Plans and take prompt action in
obtaining the sanction of the authority competent for the deviations, if any,
found necessary in their practical application. In respect of forests for which
no Working Plans exist or forests for which Working Plans have expired,
the Divisional Forest Officer shall prepare a Working scheme for such forests duly approved by the Conservator of Forests, Working Plans and work
them accordingly till they are brought under a Working Plan.
(j) The Divisional Forest Officers should make surprise inspections of the
Range Forest Offices when they are touring in the neighbourhood of such
Ranges and look into the cash book and verify the cash balance and record
a certificate of such inspection and verifications in the cash book, bring to
the notice of the Conservator of Forests any omission or irregularity found
during such inspections.
(k) Prompt recovery of revenue outstanding of the Division is one of the
most. important duties of the Divisiona1 Forest Officer. He should take
energetic action for settling the outstandings. Most of the revenue outstandings are generally due to non-enforcement of the sale conditions and terms
of agreements. In cases of recovery of revenue outstanding resting with the
authorities of the Revenue Department for recovery as arrears of Land
Revenue, the Divisional Forest Officer should keep the concerned Revenue
Officer reminded at regular intervals and should bring to the notice of the
Conservator of Forests cases of inordinate delay. Wherever legal proceedings in Civil courts are found expedient for the recovery of revenue outstandings, the Divisional Forest Officer should take prompt steps, obtaining
the necessary sanction from the higher authorities. As regards revenue outstandings due from the Government departments for supplies made he
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

should see that there is no delay in preferring the bills and that regular
reminders are issued for the return of the accepted bills. The Divisional
Forest Officers are held responsible for the recovery of all outstandings.
(l) Within the framework of Forest Account Code, the Divisional Forest
Officer shall regulate and control the grant of advances for works to the
contractors and disbursers and it is his duty to see that the advances sanctioned by him either to the Contractor or to the disburser are actually covered by the work done, or supplies made or services rendered or by cash
recovery when such advances are made, and that proper sureties or sufficient securities are taken in respect of advances made to d1econtractors.
Prompt steps to sanction the estimates of works or to .obtain:sanc6Dns of
the higher authorities for the estimates of works,. as the case may be,
before the commencement of the work should be taken by the Divisional
Forest Officers and that would go a long way in keeping the advance
position of the Division to the minimum.
(m) The Divisional Forest Officer will check the licence books and accounts
of each licence issuing officer and verify the cash balance with them at
least twice a year and note the result in the weekly diaries.
(n) The Divisional Forest Officer should test check the stock of timber and
sandalwood whenever he visits a Timber Depot, Saw-Mill or Sandalwood
depot during his inspection tours. In cases where the charges of timber and
sandalwood depots and of Saw Mills are not held by Gazetted Officers, it is
the duty of the Divisional Forest Officer to check the entire stock of timber
or sandalwood, as the case may be, once in a year either by himself or
through his Gazetted Assistant and submit an annual stock taking report to
the Conservator of Forests. This report should exhibit not only the book
balance of each kind of timber or each class of Sandalwood, but also
results of comparison of the same with the figures arrived at by actual
counting, measurement or weighment, as the case may be in respect of
timber, he should also check the timber sold, but not paid for and also
timber paid for but not removed by purchasers. A detailed list of timber
available in the Depot or Saw-mill or a detailed list of different classes of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Sandalwood available in the Depot at the time of Stock-taking should be
appended to the Stock-taking report.
(o) It is an important duty of the Divisional Forest Officer to see that the
rules regarding the transit of forest produce are scrupulously enforced by
the subordinate executive and protective staff, that the forest check-posts
established fat the purpose function properly and that the system of issue
of passes for the transit of forest produce is properly controlled and regulated.
(p) He may -also be required to perform any special work or duty which
may be entrusted to him by his superior.
(q) (i) Regarding maintenance .of Departmental elephants he is generally
responsible for the maintenance, upkeep, care and proper working of the
elephants in the Division;
(ii) He is empowered to sanction appointments of Mahuts and Kothalsand
leave to the subordinate elephant establishment as per the provisions of
the Karnataka Civil Services Rules;
(iii) He will approve the programme of work for elephants drawn by
the Range Forest Officer;
(iv) He will be responsible for proper distribution of elephants far work
in the Division;
(v) He will exercise disciplinary con1rol on the elephant staff and take
suitable action in cases of any negligence .of duty or mal practice on
their part;
(vi) When in camp, he may supervise feeding of elephants, check the
work of elephants, take notice of short or inefficient work turned out,
inspect the elephants and see to their condition and fitness and
inspect the elephant gear and see to their adequacy and good
repairs;
(vii) He may conduct surprise inspection of stock of rations and record notes of his inspection;
(viii) He may check the registers of work turned out by elephants and
cost of feed and keep of elephants;
(ix) He will make annual inspection of accoutrements.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

117. Divisional Forest Officers. Working Plans.- (a) The duties of the
Divisional Forest ,Officer, Working Plans consist of the survey of the
grawing stock enumeration of trees determination of rate of growth and
calculation of annual increment me principal species with special reference
to the soil and climatic conditions of each locality and on the basis of data
so collected, regulation of yield and preparations of Working Plans for
exploitation, regeneration, Silvicultural treatment and protection of forests,
while providing for the due exercise of the rights and privileges of the
people including grazing of cattle.
(b) He is also required to conduct survey of Forest areas and survey of the
Forest resources, and prepare maps.
(c) Careful planning of afforestation schemes and selection of suitable
areas for different species form a part of the duties of the Working Plans.
(d) He may also be required to conduct research in subjects specially
allotted to him collaboration with the Silviculturists and such other works
which may be allotted to him.
118. Silviculturists.- (a) "They will work under the direction of the Conservator of Forests, Forest Research and Utilisation Circle and in collaboration with the territorial Forest Officers and conduct research into problems
confronting the forestry practices in the State.
(b) Their sphere of work includes evolution of plantation and regeneration
technique of various species, introduction of exotic species of economic
value, investigation of methods for the improvement of the growing stock
and soil fertility, finding out of suitable species for the afforestation of denuded and arid tracts; cultivation of medicinal plants and other of economic
importance and such other things. He shall also investigate measures for
the conservation of soil and moisture and measures for controlling and
preventing any disease concerning plant species and weed problems.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(c) They will compile statistical data regarding the rate of increment and
prepare volume and yield tables for important species. Compilation of a
Silvicultural ledger of various species is an important duty of the silviculturist.
(d) They will conduct experiments in Forest Genetics, hybridisation of
different species, and seed origin. He will, for the above purposes, maintain
necessary experimental, research and demonstration plots.
(e) They will be the co-ordinating agency for the supply and distribution of
seeds and other planting material both within and outside the State.
(f) They will keep regular contracts with the Central Silviculturist, Dehra
Dun and the Silvicu1turists of the other States, exchange notes with them,
keep abreast with the development in Silvicultural research and conduct
and guide the Silvicultural research in the State.
(g) They may also be required to do any special work or duty that may be
entrusted to him by his superior officers.

119. Forest Utilisation Officer.- (a) The duties of the Forest~Utilisation
Officer will include among other things, the encouragement of more effective and intensive utilisation of forest products in trade, industries, etc.
popularization of the various indigenous forest products as substitute to
those imported. improvement in the logging technique and tools by mechanisation to save loss during conversion and the finding out of ways and
means for the proper utilisation of inferior species of trees by seasoning,
preservative treatment or processing such timbers into various types of
processed woods.
(b) It is his duty to study the trends in the market for timber and other forest
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

produce and work in collaboration with the territorial Divisional Forest
Officers, to secure the best price for the timber and other forest produce
sold by them.
(c) He may freely supply information to the general public and industries
whenever information regarding the utilisation, suitability and avail ability of
any species of timber or other forest produce and such other matters as are
-sought for by them. Results of research in forest products in the country
should be published by him through proper media.
(d) Besides conducting research and investigation in the utilisation of forest
products, he will pool information on the developments in the utilisation of
forest products in the country and outside.
(e) It is his duty to arrange for proper publicity and propaganda to secure
more favourable new markets for the forest products of the State.
(f) He will give expert opinion after a thorough examination in cases
referred to him to examine any samples of wood in any legal proceedings.
(g) It is his duty to do any' special work that may be entrusted to him by his
superior Officers.
120. Duties of Assistant Conservators of Forests.- (a) He is immediately
subordinate to the Divisional Forest Officer in all matters, receives orders
and instructions from him and assists him in supervision and inspection of
works like departmental logging. coupe works, plantation works, building
and communication works in addition to SilviculturaI works in which
required technical skill and knowledge. He assists the Divisional Forest
Officer to a very great extent in the supervision and inspection of works
including check measurement and in control of the establishment.
(b) He will frequently inspect the Range Forest Offices, the timber depots,
check posts and licence issuing stations within his Sub-Division and see
that the works therein are carried on properly and the accounts, registers
and books are maintained in order and posted up-to-date. He will also
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

check the stock of timber in the depots under the Range Forest Officer or
foresters and the accounts of the timber transactions cheque maintained
therein and bring cases of irregularities to the notice of the Divisional Forest
Officer.
(c) He will compound or deal with the forest offence cases booked by him
or the Range Forest Officers within the powers delegated to him as per the
Karnataka Forest Rules, 1969.
(d) He will conduct petty sales of forest produce and sanction the highest
bid under the powers delegated to him as per Karnataka Forest Rules,
1969.
(e) Wherever there are no territorial Sub-Divisions the Assistant
Conservator of Forests attached to the Divisions will perform the duties
entrusted to them by the Divisional Forest Officer.
121. Officers in charge of Timber Depots, Sandalwood Depots.- (a)
These Officers are responsible for the proper functioning of the organisation under their charges, the stock of forest produce transacted therein, the
maintenance of accounts, registers and books in respect of such
transactions and for the control of the establishment employed therein.
(b) It is the duty of the Depot Officer to correctly measure and/or weigh the
timber or sandalwood received at the depot in his presence.
(c) The release of timber or Sandalwood to the purchaser shall be in
accordance with the terms of sale or supply and he shall personally held
responsible for any irregularities committed by him in this behalf.
(d) They shall also be responsible for the safety of the stock of timber,
sandalwood, machinery, etc., under their charge and they shall take adequate precautions in this behalf. ,
(e) These officers work the immediate control of the Divisional Forest
Officers concerned or the Conservator of Forests, as the case may be, and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

receive instructions and orders from them.
122. Officers in charge of Mobile Squads.- (a) The administrative control
of a squad is vested with the Divisional Forest Officer or Conservator of
Forests depending upon the administrative convenience and the officer in
charge of a squad may thus be under the immediate control of the Divisional Forest Officer or Conservator of Forests as the case may be, and
from whom he will receive instructions and orders.
(b) The squad Officer shall exercise proper control over the establishment
under him and shall see that they maintain discipline and do their work
properly.
(c) He will keep regular contacts with the territorial controlling executive and
protective staff and detect cases.
(d) He should always be Vigilant and maintain informants at strategic
places to obtain information regarding the activities of the smugglers of
forest produce.
(e) He and his staff should constantly patrol the forest and the customary
routes through which forest produce is smuggled and see that the incidence of smuggling of Forest produce is reduced.
(f) Checking of forest produce in transit and detection of cases violating the
transit rules would be the most important duty of the Mobile Squad.
(g) The Squad Officer and his staff may seek the assistance and cooperation of the Officers of the Police Department/Special Police C.I.D.
(Forest Cell).
123. Range Forest Officer.- (i) The Range Forest Officer is the officer in
executive charge of the Range and he is responsible for the efficient management of the Range, for the custody and condition of all Government
property in his charge, and for the discipline, conduct and work of all his
subordinate staff.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ii) He is responsible for the execution of all works in the Range with the
help of his Foresters and Guards and according to the instructions and
orders of the Divisional Forest Officer.
(iii) He is responsible for the collection and credit of Forest revenue for the
prompt and correct payment of all sums due for the works executed.
(iv) He must carry out his inspections diligently and see that all his
subordinates do their work properly. In the event of serious misconduct on
the part of any of his subordinates, the Range Forest Officer should report
the case to the Divisional Forest Officer with the explanation of the subordinates for taking further disciplinary action as per rules.
(v) He is also responsible for the correct maintenance of all accounts,
relating to revenue, expenditure, stocks of timber and other forest produce
yield of forest produce and. other matters connected with the Range, the
punctual submission of his accounts and reports and the proper handling of
his correspondence in the manner laid down by departmental code and
manual.
(vi) He should prescribe a definite programme of work from time to time for
execution, by each subordinate, and see that the works thus assigned are
properly carried out.
(vii) In order to keep the subordinates in the strict path of duty, constant
supervision and surprise inspections by the Range Forest Officer are
necessary. The inspection of a Beat by the Range Forest Officer should
relate mainly to.
(1) the examination of the Guards uniform, clothing, accoutrements,
and other Government property that may be entrusted to his charge;
(2) the inspection of the Forest Guards' diary book, F.I. report book,
maps and plan of the Beat and order file;
(3) the inspection of the state of protection and the state of boundary
tines and boundary marks of the reserved and other forests
in
charge of the Forest Guard; and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(4) the inspection of such special works in the Beat as may have
been entrusted to him for execution.
(viii) The state of protection and demarcation of the forest should receive
the Range Forest Officer's special attention. Evidence of illicit fellings, Goat
brousing, cattle trespass in dosed areas, and the proper maintenance of
sign-boards to indicate areas closed and open to grazing should also
receive his attention. Where illicit fellings are observed, the stumps should
be examined to find out if they bear the impression of the ‘Guard's hammer
mark and if they were reported with reference to the Guard's diary book
and F.I. report book. Where Goat brousing and trespass of cattle in closed
areas are observed. the subordinate must be able to pro\1e on the spot
with reference to his diary book and F.I report book that the of the offences
had been reported. A similar check should be exercised when the boundary
lines and boundary marks are examined.
(ix) He should check the muster-rolls and the mazdoors engaged for any
work in the Range as prescribed in Forest Account Code.
(x) He should also check the register of licences (issued) maintained by the
Guard showing all the licences executed in the Beat and compare the
entries with the duplicates of licences issued.
(xi) He is generally responsible for the protection of forest under his charge,
investigation of Forest offences, supervision over forest works, checking
the removal of forest produce by purchasers and by right and privilegeholders.
(xii) He will execute the sanctioned works at the proper time, incur
expenditure on departmental works at the rates not exceeding sanctioned
rates and record the measurements and quantities of work done in the
books and registers maintained for the purpose.
(xiii) He is also responsible for the timely disbursement of pay and allowances of the subordinate staff.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xiv) It is his duty to explain to his subordinates, the existing rights and
privileges of villagers, if any, in the forest and the legal actions to be taken
when necessary under the Forest Act and Rules.
(xv) He should inspect periodically the accounts of the Depot Officers under
his control, subordinate officers entrusted with the collection of revenue and
forest contractors and lessees and report to the Divisional Forest Officer,
cases of any irregularity or default.
(xvi) He is responsible for the correct posting up of control books and
journals, plantation registers and journals of Reserved forests.
(xvii) Whenever forest rest houses are inspected the Range Forest Officer
should examine the rain-gauge, if any, set up in the compound, and check
the entries made in the Rain-guage register. He should also examine the
bungalow book and ascertain whether rents noted in the register as 'Paid'
have been duly brought to account. If any repairs are needed, whether to
roads, bungalows, or furniture he should prepare and submit the necessary
estimates to the Divisional Forest Officer.
(xviii) Laying out of coupes accurately, where the Surveyors are not
available, and marking of trees for felling or reservation is .the responsibility
of the Range Forest Officer. The Range Forest Officer should frequently
inspect the coupes.
(xix) Maintenance of boundary lines and boundary marks of forests in good
condition and repair is an important duty of the Range Forest Officer and
he .should perambulate the boW1dary lines at least once in a year and
submit a report to the Divisional Forest Officer in the form prescribed in
Karnataka Forest Manual regarding the condition of the boundary.
(xx) The Range Forest Officer is responsible for clearing and fire-tracing of
all fire lines in his Range. He should proceed immediately on receipt of
intimation of any fire occurrence to the spot and take prompt steps for
extinguishing.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xxi) It is the duty of the Range Forest Officer to submit estimates for works
to the Divisional Forest Officer for sanction and take up the execution of the
work on receipt of such sanction. All measurements of works completed
should be recorded on the spot in the Field Note Book or Measurement
Book, as the case may be, by the Range Forest Officer under his dated
signature and completion reports of all sanctioned works must be submitted
to the Divisional Forest Officer after the work is completed, inspected and
passed by the Divisional Forest Officer. (xxii) The Range Forest Officers
should personally check in detail, the stock and the accounts of reach
timber depot under their control once in a year and report result to the
Divisional Forest Officer. (xxiii) The Range Forest Officers should maintain
their cash books posted up-to-date.
(xxiv) The Range Forest Officer should always wear the prescribed uniforms whenever he is on duty and carry with him a bill-hook. It is his duty to
see that the Foresters and Guards subordinate to him wear full uniform
only when on duty and use their private clothing when off duty. The Range
Forest Officer should teach the Foresters and Guards how to dress and
salute smartly.
(xxv) The Range. Forest Officer should extensively tour, every month
inspecting forests, supervising works, checking forest produce in transit,
and checking the works of his subordinates. Hurried marches should be
avoided except investigation of forest offences. Halts inside or in the vicinity
of forests should be made to enable him to inspect forests or works
thoroughly. He should programme his tour properly so as to carry out the
inspection of works with regularity.
(xxvi) Punctual submission of diaries once in a week with full details as to
the works allotted, their progress during the week and the balance remaining to be done is an important duty of the Range Forest Officer.
(xxvii) All subordinates in a Range are under the direct control of the Range
Forest Officer who in turn is supervised by the Divisional Forest Officer or
Assistant Conservator of Forests. The subordinates in the Range must
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

obey the orders issued by the Range Forest Officer and obtain instructions
from him. All correspondence connected with the work in his Range should
pass through him and any subordinate wishing to submit representation to
the Divisional Forest Officer or other superior officer may do so only
through him. court summons issued to any subordinate should similarly be
served through the Range Forest Officer, who has to arrange for the duties
of the subordinate being carried out during his absence.
(xxviii) His first duty when he takes charge of a Range is to find out the
nature, value and extent of the Fore.-t property committed to his charge
and to W1derstand the plans and schemes prescribed for the conservation,
improvement, protection and management of that property which may
consist" not only of natural forests, but also of plantations, roads, bridges,
buildings, live and dead stock and so forth. He should also know the 1egal
status of his forests and ensure whether he has got proper maps and
working plans in all cases. He must know what staff he has, where they are
stationed, what works are assigned to each and what their responsibilities
are. He must know the revenue target fixed for the Range, their sources
and agencies employed 'for its collection. He must know what works are in
progress, what works are still to be commenced, and the agency employed
for their execution; supervision and control. He must examine the condition
of all Government property entrusted in his charge, stock position of timber
and other produce taken charge of, the condition of boundary lines and
boundary marks of forests, and get to know a thorough knowledge of the
local conditions markets, labour sources, etc., which bear on the
management of the forests. It is essential for him to have a properknowledge of the measures to be employed by him for the efficient
protection of the forests and for the proper execution of all works connected
with their utilisation and improvement.
(xxix) Detection, of forest offences and their investigation, filing of chargesheets, in respect of cases ordered for prosecution by the Divisional Forest
Officer and the successful prosecution of forest offence cases in law Courts
form part of the important duties of the Range Forest Officer.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xxx) The Range Forest Officer's important function is the organisation of
works entrusted to him and for that purpose he should be capable of
recruiting labour and engaging them effectively.
(xxxi) While executing works given out on contract basis, the Range Forest
Officer should carefully study the terms of the agreement, specifications,
plans, estimates, etc., and see that they are scrupulously observed, without
allowing for any deviations except under the orders of the Divisional Forest
Officer.
(xxxii) Correct valuation of forest property is an important duty of the Forest
Range Officer and he shall be responsible for any underestimation or overestimation of its value.
(xxxiii) (1) He will see that there is enough timber in the coupes, before an
indent for elephants is made.
(2) He should not allow elephants to keep idle of timber or want of dragging
gear.
(3) He will see the contractors supplies proper rations in time, and arrange
for their receipt, storage and issue. 'He will prepare monthly bills of
contractors for the supply of rations. Whenever it is found necessary, he
will arrange for the local purchase of rations and other articles.
(4) He should make surprise inspections of stock of rations with each
Mahut.
(5) He will pay surprise visits to elephant camps at feeding hours and
supervise over-feeding of elephants.
(6) He shall be responsible for the proper extraction of work from each
elephant and report cases of Mahuts who are not extracting proper work
from the elephants to the Divisional Forest Officer.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(7) When elephants are reported sick, he shall instruct the Jamedar to
attend to First-Aid treatment, if of ordinary nature. In serious cases, he will
immediately wire to the Veterinary Inspector in charge of elephants to
proceed forthwith for treating the sick elephant. He may indent upon the
services of the local Veterinary Inspector in emergent cases. In any case,
he should keep -the Divisional Forest Officer informed of the action taken.
(8) He should attend to the immediate repairs, of the elephant gear, etc., so
as to avoid dislocation of work.
(9) He shall exercise disciplinary control over Jamedar, Mahut and
Kothaland take suitable action in cases of negligence of duty, malpractice,
etc. He shall also see that they wear the prescribed uniforms while on duty.
(10) He shall maintain registers of (1) Record of cost, feed and keep of
elephants, (2) Weekly statement of work turned out by elephants, (3)
Record of work turned out by elephants during each month. and' (4) Record
of cost of feed and maintenance of elephants 'and the value of work turned
out and submit monthly statements in the prescribed forms to the Divisional
Forest Officer.
(11) He will maintain service registers of each elephant under his charge
and make the necessary entries therein and record periodic measurements
required to be recorded.
123-A. Veterinary Inspector in-charge of Elephants.- (1) He is responsible for the medical treatment of elephants under his charge.
(2) The Veterinary Inspector should examine each elephant at least once
in a month.
(3) He will prescribe rations for the working, non-working and sick elephants.
(4) He will supervise over-feeding of elephants during his inspections and
also check the stock and quality of rations.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(5) He will submit annual indents for the supply of medicines required for
the year and stock them at a Central place. He should keep 'in each
elephant camp a medicine chest with sufficient stocks of medicines in
charge of the Jamedar for First-Aid treatment.
(6) It shall be his primary duty to attend on a sick elephant immediately on
receipt of a report of sickness.
(7) He will also supervise over proper training of elephants.
(8) He will maintain a Health Register of elephants and forward to the
Range Forest Officer. Divisional Forest Officer and Conservator of Forests
a fortnightly health report.
(9) He will maintain a stock register of medicines and a clinical register
indicating the treatment given to sick elephants.
(10) He should see that the Jamedar, Mahut and Kothal take proper care of
the elephant, regarding feeding, pasturing, watering, bathing of the animal,
that the elephants are not unnecessarily teased or over-worked, that the
sanitation of the elephant camp is properly maintained and report to the
Range Forest Officer the conditions of the elephant gear, etc., wherever
necessary.
124, Foresters and Section Officers. (i) Where a Forester is posted to the
charge of a Section he is directly responsible to the Range Forest Officer
for the proper protection of the forests and other Government property
included in his Section and for the execution of such works as may be
ordered to be carried out in it.
(ii) He should maintain the discipline of the Forest Guards and see that they
know their duties and carry them out efficiently.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(iii) He should have a thorough knowledge of the nature and extent of the
forest property entrusted to him and protect it with atmost vigilance and
diligence.
(iv) He should, by frequent patrolling and perambulation of the Beats under
his jurisdiction see that the Beat Guards maintain the boundary lines and
boundary marks of forests in proper repairs and order and that illicit fellings,
Goat-brousing, and grazing in closed areas do not take place in their Beats.
(v) He will assist the Range Forest Officer in the execution of special works,
detection and investigation of forest offences, issue of licences and passes
when specially authorised, checking of forest produce in transit and in the
execution of licence's for timber and other produce within his Section. He
will also assist the Range Forest Officer in laying out of coupes, marking for
felling, reservation of standards, and in controlling the extraction and
removal of timber or other forest produce from the coupe.
(vi) He should have a thorough knowledge of the rights and privileges of
the villagers in his Section and regulate the removal of forest produce by
right and privilege holders accordingly and as per the rules in force.
(vii) Supervision over the maintenance of fire-traces in the Reserved
Forests protected 'and plantations, etc., during the fire season, control over
the work of the fire-patrols engaged. for the protection of forests from fire
and surprise visits to ensure that each Beat Guard and fire-patrol is vigilant,
are the duties of the Forester in charge of a Section. It shall be his duty to
take immediate steps to extinguish the fire, if any, observed by him or
reported to him, collecting all the available assistance from the neighbouring, villages, right and privilege holders, and forest contractors and lessees.
(viii) He should know the source of labour and be capable of recruiting
them for the execution of departmental works. He should, when required by
the Range Forest Officer, maintain the muster-roll of labourers engaged on
departmental works, and render the accounts to the Range Forest Officer.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ix) While supervising the works of contractors, he should be in a position to
control the works, having a complete knowledge of the terms of the
contract specifications, plans, estimates, etc.
(x) When he is entrusted with the collection of forest revenue, he should
maintain proper accounts and render them punctually to the Range Forest
Officer.
(xi) He will also collect drift and stranded timber in his Section and take
temporary custody of timber and other forest produce seized in forest
offence cases.
(xii) He should see that the First Information Report in respect of forest
offences detected by him and his Beat Guards are promptly sent to the
Range Forest Officer and the Divisional Forest Officer and the seizure reported to the concerned Magistrate'.
(xiii) He will carry out Silvicultural works such as sowings, plantings, cultural
operations, nursery works, collection of seeds, etc., as ordered by the
Range Forest Officer.
(xiv) He shall maintain registers, books and accounts required of him,
render the accounts and returns, if any, thereof and submit his, weekly
diaries to the Range Forest Officer punctually.
(xv) It is his duty to wear uniform when on duty and carry with him a map of
his section, diary, a bill-hook and see that his Beat Guards do the same.
124-A. Elephant Jamedar/Forester In-charge of Elephants- (1) He will
work under the orders of the Range Forest Officer in whose jurisdiction the
elephants are stationed for work.
(2) He is responsible for the execution of each day's work, and will see that
elephants leave the camp for their daily work early in the morning and put
in at least 6 hours of work each day. He should go with the elephants to the
work spot and see that the Mahouts extract from each elephant the work
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

prescribed for it. .
(3) He should see that the Mahouts do not ill-treat the elephant.
(4) He should see that the Mahouts are trained to exercise proper control
over their elephants.
(5) He should see that the elephants gear is kept by the Mahouts in good
and efficient condition.
(6) He will see that the;> elephants are well washed and kept dean.
(7) He will see that Kothals keep the elephant stand dear of dung etc.
(8) He will see that each elephant gets the prescribed feed at the prescribed time daily.
(9) He will see that the elephants that are set free in the forest for grazing in
the evening are taken to an area of forest where there is good grass and
fodder and that they are properly hobbled.
(10) He will see that the Kothals collect grass and branch fodder whenever
available for feeding the elephants.
(11) He will repost breakages of accoutrements to the Range Forest Officer
and arrange with his approval for the immediate repair or replacement of
the damaged or broken articles.
(12) He will attend to the first-aid treatment of elephants sick or injured in
ordinary cases, and report to the Range Forest Officer.
(13) He should exercise disciplinary control over Mahouts and Kothals and
see that they wear the prescribed uniforms while on duty.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(14) He is also responsible for the proper training of the elephants.
125. Beat Guards.-(i) The duties of a Beat Guard are.-(1) to know the
boundaries of his Beat thoroughly, prevent encroachment,. protect his Beat
against injury from fire or other causes.
(ii) To patrol the forests constantly in his Beat to prevent offences; where
the offences are detected, he must submit First information reports
promptly to the Range Forest Officer and the Divisional Forest Officer and
assist the Forester and the Range Forest Officer in their further investigation. In this connection, it must be pointed out that the real test of a Forest
Guard's work is the State of Forests in his Beat.
(iii) To maintain the boundary lines and boundary marks of Reserved and
other forests in proper order and repair.
(iv) He should see that the rights and privileges existing, if any, in the forest
of his Beat are not infringed by the villagers.
(v) He should cut creepers and climbers during his perambulations in the
forests.
(vi) He should keep the sign-boards and name boards of forests and
plantations and boundary marks of coupes in good condition and repair.
(vii) He should know all areas open and dosed to grazing in his ,neat,
provide sign-boards, indicating areas closed to grazing, and see that no
grazing takes place in the areas dosed. He should never permit goat brousing in the Reserved and Protected forests under his charge. Trespassing
cattle should be impounded in the nearest cattle pounds and the offence
reported to the Range Forest .Officer with the pound receipt. He should
prevent unauthorised lopping of trees.
(viii) He should collect drift and stranded timber.
(ix) He should check licences (Permits), control their execution and attest,
and date the endorsement of such check on the license. All licenses
checked and executed should be noted down with necessary particulars in
a register to be maintained by him.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(x) He should check forest produce in transit and see that the forest
produce is not removed except in accordance with the transit rules.
(xi) He should possess a knowledge of the several forest works that are in
progress in the Beat and control and supervise over such of the works as
ordered by Section Forester and the Range Forest Officer. He should also
know the forest contracts and leases under operation in his Beat and the
obligations imposed on such contracts and leases with a view to enforce
them.
(xii) He should be vigilant and be on the look out for fires in the fire season,
fire trace the fire-lines in good time, prevent kindling of fire public or private
way in forests, -control and supervise over the work of fire-patrols engaged
and take immediate steps to put out the fire in the event of their occurrence
by collecting the neighbouring villagers, right and privilege holders and
workmen of the contractors and lessees, if any, in the areas. He should, for
that purpose know who are all legally bound to render assistance in case of
forest fires.
(xiii) He should know the source .of labour and should be in a position to
recruit and organise them an any forest work undertaken departmentally
and supervise and control the work. When he is entrusted with any special
works involving the employment of labourers on daily wages, he should
maintain the muster-roll correctly.
(xiv) He should carry out silvicultural works such as sowings, plantings,
nursery works, collection of seeds, creeper cutting, pruning, thinning of
coppice-shoots, and such other cultural operations as ordered by the Section Forester or the Range Forest Officer.
(xv) He should keep his uniforms and accoutrements clean and tidy and
use them whenever he is on duty- He should never make use of the uniforms when he is not on duty. He should always carry with lima bill-hook
notebook and other things in a havoc sack or a bag.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xvi) He should have a fair knowledge of the different kinds of trees
occurring in his beat, their distribution. the several plantations raised in his
Beat and the years of their formation, the Chief items of Minor Forest Produce available in the Beat and the season and the method of their
collection, and the important Wild animals and Wild Birds occurring in his
Beat.
(xvii) He should know every line, and feature of his Beat.
(xviii) Whenever he is entrusted 'with the charge of any rest-house or
inspection lodge or Forest Bangalore he -should keep them their compounds, and approach roads clean and tidy and protect them and the furniture and other articles kept in them safe from damage. He should also
protect all Government property such as roads, bridges, buildings, checkpost, Rain-guage stations, etc., in the Beat and promptly report any
damage to them to the Range Forest Office.
(xix) He should affix on all illicitly cut stumps of trees in the forest, a
hammer mark prescribed for the purpose, make a note of the exact locality,
description and number of such stumps in his diary book and report about
them to the Range Forest Officer. Where such hammer marks are not
found and when no reference to the report made can be produced. it will be
presumed that the Forest Guard bas failed to patrol and perform his functions properly.
(xx) He should submit all his reports to the Forester and the Range Forest
Officer promptly. He should maintain diaries and produce them for
inspection whenever required by his superior officers.
(xxi) To discharge his duties properly and effectively he must be provided
with the following equipments, by the Range Forest Officer concerned.
(1) A plan of his Beat, showing therein the Reserved and other kinds of
forests, plantations, buildings, roads, the demarcation lines of forests and
their lengths and the boundary marks such as cairns or pillars and their
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

number and situation.
(2) A diary book with its pages numbered in print to enable him to note
down what he did, what offences he detected, what works he supervised
and what licenses, permits or passes he checked and such other
information.
(3) A report book with its pages in duplicate machine-numbered.
(4) A copying pencil, carbon paper, ordinary paper, and service postage
stamps.
(5) A file book for filing any written orders that he may receive from his
superior officers.
(6) First Information Report forms and seizure report forms.
(7) A register for entering the licenses executed in his Beat, with columns
showing the kind and quantity licensed, the license number and date the
date and time of presentation of the triplicate license, the date and time of
receipt of the duplicate license, the date and time of checking the produce
licensed and recording the endorsement and such other details as the
Range Forest Officer desires to prescribe.
(8) A Guards' hammer, a bill-hook or a hand-axe should be with him where
he is on duty.
125-A. Mahouts.- (1) He, being the person directly in charge of the
elephant, is primarily responsible for 'the proper feeding, maintenance and
upkeep of the elephant in good and healthy condition. His efficiency can
best be judged by the condition of the animal in his charge.
(2) He should feed the elephant with the prescribed quantity of rations at
prescribed hours regularly and water them regularly.
(3) He should regularly bathe the animal daily and keep it clean and tidy.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(4) Wounds, etc., should be regularly dressed by him as per instructions of
the Veterinary Inspector.
(5) He should closely observe the animal daily to see if it shows any
symptoms of any ailment and report cases of sickness to the Jamedar and
the Range Forest Officer. He should see whether the elephant has properly
slept or not.
(6) Fresh galls, if any, developed on the animal should be spotted out by
him on careful examination and treated immediately.
(7) The dung of the elephant should be examined by him! daily to see if it
has eaten mud and if it is fit to be taken out for work.
(8) He should maintain the elephant gear in proper condition and report any
breakages to the Jamedar or the Range Forest Officer.
(9) He should extract the prescribed work from the elephant under his
charge; should not overwork the animal; should not attempt to extract work
beyond its capacity and should not tease the animal unnecessarily.
(10) He ,should see that the hobbles and trailing chains are properly
secured while leaving the animal to graze in forests.
(11) He should leave the animal for grazing in forest areas where there is
enough grass and fodder.
(12) Every morning, he should go out himself or send his Kothal to fetch the
animal from the forest so that they may be sent to work in time.
(13) He should see that castor oil is applied to the head of the elephant
regularly every day and that the parts of the body that come in contact with
hobbles, chains, collar, gear etc., are smeared with castor oil so as to make
the parts smooth to prevent injuries.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(14) He is responsible for the proper training of the elephant.
(15) He will, with the assistance of the Kothal cook the elephant food where
cooked food is given to elephants.
125-B. Kothal -(1)He will assist the Mahout in all the duties required to be
performed by him, and in addition should see that the elephant stand is
kept clear of dung etc.
(2) Should collect grass and branch fodder for feeding elephants whenever
available and
(3) should scrub the elephant properly at the time of bathing.
126. Office Business.- The office procedure to be followed in Government
offices including the Offices of the Forest Department are dealt with, in
detail in the Hand book of office procedure issued by the General Administration Department of the Government of Karnataka. All Officers will
refer the Handbook for purposes of office business.
127. Correspondence of Divisional Forest Officers.- AII correspondence
issued from the Divisional Forest Officer will issue in the name of the
Divisional Forest Officer and all correspondence intended for the Divisional
Forest Officer be addressed to him.
All correspondence addressed to the Divisional Forest Officer shall be
opened by him in person and he may, if circumstances permit, take with
him into camp his current register and an current papers, except those
relating to accounts, so that papers may be promptly disposed of without
reference to Headquarters. Covers superscribed “Accounts” shall be
opened by the Clerk of the Divisional Forest officer’s office during the
absence of the Divisional Forest Officer on tour. Telegrams addressed to
the Divisional Forest Officer and received at Headquarters when he is in
camp, may, if circumstances permit, be opened by a Gazetted Officer at
the Divisional Forest Officer's Headquarters and pass on to the Head Clerk
of the, Divisional Forest Officer's Office for immediate action, unless the
contents of the telegram are such as should be kept confidential, in the
opinion, of the Officer who opens it, in which case he will place it in a
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

sealed cover and forward it to the Head clerk of the Divisional Forest
Officer for immediate transmission to the Divisional Forest Officer in camp.
If there is no such officer at Headquarters, the Divisional Forest Officer may
authorise his Superintendent to open telegram received at Headquar1els,
when he is in camp.
The Superintendent of Divisional Forest Officer's Office may sign the fair
copies of drafts, approved by the Divisional Forest officer the following form
being adopted.
True copy / By order
A.B.C.
Divisional Forest Officer.
sd/Superintendent
Note.~ (1) Fair copies of orders sanctioning payment of money should,
however, be signed only by the sanctioning authority or, if he is in camp, by
any Gazetted Officer at Headquarters.
(2) Fair copies of important letters such as those relating to payment of
money as also those relating to acceptance of booked figures, etc., to the
Accountant General should be signed only by the Head of the Office or an
authorised Gazetted Officer of the Office.
128. Correspondence by the Divisional Forest Officer with the Chief
conservator of Forests and Conservator of Forests.
The Divisional Forest Officer shall not address the O1iefConservator of
Forests except through the Conservator of Forests. The Divisional Forest
Officer will adopt the letter form for correspondence with his superior officers, members of Parliament and Legislature and his fellow officers.
129. Tours and Diaries.- (1) The Controlling Executive and Protective staff
of the Forest Department shall be required to tour in the areas in their
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

charge for inspection of forests and of the works carried out in them.
(2) All Gazetted Officers of the Department whose duties require them to
tour in the areas under their charge should draw up a programme of tour to
be made during each month, in the last week of the previous month, and
adhere to it, as far as possible. While drawing such programmes, the officers should keep in view the inspection of forests and works, the meetings
and conferences to be attended to, inspection of offices and depots, sales
of timber and other produce and the tours and inspection of their superior
officers. The Chief Conservator of Forests will send the copy of his tour
programme to the Secretary to Government in the Food and Forest
Departments. The Conservator of Forests will send a copy of his tour
programme to the Chief Conservator of Forests. The Divisional Forest
Officer will send a copy of his tour programme to the Conservator of
Forests. The Assistant Conservators of Forests holding independent offices
will send their tour programmes to their next higher officers under whom
they are working.
(3) Hurried and rapid marches should be avoided as such tours do not
permit for efficient arid useful inspections of forests and works. Halts inside
or in 'the vicinity of forests should be made, wherever possible, in order to
enable the officer to inspect the forests or works thoroughly. Frequent journeys., backwards and forwards to and from headquarters, involving as they
do great waste of time, energy and money shall be avoided.
(4) The tours of Divisional Forest Officers and Assistant Conservator of
Forests should be arranged as to permit a detailed inspection of Ranges.
The Divisional Forest Officer should camp out at least 15 days in a month
and Assistant Conservator of Forests at least 20 days in a month and carry
out intensive inspections of the areas visited. The tour should not only be
an inspecting tour, but also one in which the Range works are properly
organised with a view to have them executed in proper season in an efficient manner. Each forest should be inspected in detail and .aI1 works
should be checked. The work turned out by every individual from the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Range Forest Officer down to the Forest Guard should be examined and
necessary instructions given on the spot. All important works such as marking of trees for felling or retention in coupes, sowings, plantings and other
cultural operations, nursery works, works of exploitation of timber and other
forest produce, road and building works, fire protection and boundary
demarcation works should receive the personal attention of the Inspecting
Officer on tour.
(5) Range Forest Officers, Foresters and Forest Guards should 'Spend
greater portion of their time in the various parts of their charge away from
headquarters and not content themselves generally journeying out to inspect their works and returning to headquarters in the course of the day.
The latter practice renders effective supervision of the forests impossible
and hardly affords occasion to them to control the protection of forests and
the execution of works in them. They should stay out from headquarters 2
or 3 days at a time, whenever necessary, and devote their full attention in
the supervision of works, inspection of forests and in contacting with the
villagers and educating them in the matter of protection of forests. Range
Forest Officers are expected to spend at least 20 days in each month away
from headquarters on tours.
Touring Officers should satisfy themselves before leaving a camp that all
supplies received or services accepted, whether by themselves, their servants or their official establishment have been duly paid for at adequate
rates by the persons concerned.
(6) That each member of the subordinate staff does his assigned duty in an
honest and straightforward manner can be ascertained only by frequent
inspections by a superior agency. Repeated surprise inspections of the forests and of the works carried out in them, a careful periodical examination
of all accounts, registers and record of works maintained by the subordinates, and above all, a patient and enduring effort to improve the morale
and character of the subordinates by example and influence should go a
long way towards getting the subordinate to do their work properly. This by
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

itself cannot help the controlling officer to control the protection of forests
and the execution of works in them day after day unless he receives a
written report from each subordinate as to what exactly the latter is doing
daily. Consequently diaries are prescribed for submission at the end of
each week, the object being to keep the higher officer informed of their
movements and of the nature and progress of works on which they Are
employed and further to serve as a medium of communication in a demiofficial manner on all matters requiring advice, suggestions and orders.
(7) (a) The weekly diaries should be from 1st to 7th , 8th to 15th, 16th to 23rd
and from 24th to end of the month respectively for each month and be
despatched so as to reach the next higher officer before the close of the
next week.
(b) Delay in the submission of diaries should be avoided. If the delay
exceeds over ten days from the time stipulated for submission of diaries,
disciplinary actions should be instituted by the competent authorities-on
such delinquents.
(8) (a) Forest Guards, be they in charge of Beats or in charge of special
works, whenever they are required to submit diaries, should do so through
the Section Officer or Forester to the concerned Range Forest Officer, who
will review them and take necessary action. But, normally they are not
expected to submit diaries.
(b) Foresters should submit their diaries to the concerned Range Forest
Officer, who in turn will submit them with his remarks to the Divisional
Forest Officer through proper channel. The Range Forest Officer should
submit his diaries to the Divisional Forest Officer. The diaries of the Range
Forest Officers and Foresters will be retained in the Divisional Forest
Office, communicating only any remarks and observations made on them
to the Range Forest Officer. The latter officer should, thereafter, carry out
the instructions, if any, contained in such remarks and observations and
report to the Divisional Forest Officer, stating the action taken by him to
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

give effect to the instructions.
(c) Assistant Conservator of Forests should send their diaries weekly to the
Conservator of Forests or the Divisional Forest Officer whoever is their next
higher officer under whom they are working. They will be reviewed and
recorded by the latter officer in his office communicating only such remarks
and instructions as he may find advisable to convey. Action taken by them
on such instructions or remarks made by the Conservator of Forests or the
Divisional Forests Officer, as the case may be, should be reported by the
officers.
(d) The Divisional Forest Officers should send their fortnightly (1st to 15th
and from 16th to end of the month) diaries to the Conservator of Forests,
who will review and retain them in his office, conveying only his
observations and remarks if any, to the Divisional Forest Officer. All such
instructions and remarks should be taken note of by the Divisional Forest
Officers and the action taken on them should be reported to the
Conservator of Forests.
(9) (a) The diary should contain a brief summary of what the officer did
each day in the week or fortnight, as the case may be. If a forest was
inspected, the name of the forest visited and the exact portion of it that was
inspected and full but concise details of works done or inspected should be
stated along with the result of such inspection;
(b) A definite statement of progress, showing the various works allotted and
their quantity, the progress achieved up to the beginning of the week or
fortnight, the progress made during the week or fortnight and the balance
remaining to be done, should be furnished at the end of the diary;
(c) The Divisional Forest Officers should note in their diaries, the enquiries
held by them and the moral tone and character of the subordinates during
the inspection of the Ranges and any observations made by them during
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

their tour of inspection that may in their opinion require to be conveyed to
the higher officers;
(d) The subordinate executive and protective staff should, in addition,
mention in their weekly diaries the particulars of forest offence cases
detected by them and the boundaries and boundary marks of forests
inspected by them;
(e) Information should also be furnished regarding the camp where the halt
was made, the distance traversed each day, the mode of conveyance
adopted for the purpose the hour of departure from headquarters or camp
and the hour return to it or to any other destination at the close of the
journey, and the date of previous visit to that place or locality.
(10) The diary of an officer or a subordinate, as a general rule, should
contain interesting and useful details of his week's or fortnight's doings. It
must, however, be remembered that it is not the length, but the usefulness
of the diary that is wanted and the work of the officer or subordinate will be
judged in part by the promptness with which he submits his diaries and the
amount of useful and correct information they contain.
(11) All officers and subordinates should maintain a pocket notebook which
must always be kept in their possession while on tour and in it they should
enter on the spot all notes on works done each day, such as forests or
works inspected, things observed, instructions issued and such other
matters that may provide material basis for the writing up of diaries or
making special reports. They will maintain a diary register in which full
details of works done or inspected with the results of inspection should be
recorded, sending a copy of it every week, fortnight or month, as the case
may be, in the prescribed form.
(12) The Conservator of Forests will send monthly tour journal to .the Chief
Conservator of Forests, so as to reach him before the 15th of the
succeeding month and they will be reviewed by him and remarks communicated to the Conservator of Forests. The Chief Conservator of Forests,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

will send his monthly tour journal to the Secretary to Government, Food
and Forest Departments.
130. The following special instructions have been issued regarding
correspondence in Forest Offices.- (1) The number of registers and
forms to be maintained in Divisional Forest and Range officers should be
confined to those prescribed in this Code or under the orders of the
Government, or the Chief Conservator of Forests and without the sanction
of these authorities no new form should be brought into use.
(2) Reminders in regard to all references which are more than a month old
should be issued by a monthly list to be despatched on a fixed date to the
officers concerned with instructions to return the same within a fortnight
with their replies in their own handwriting, reminders in urgent cases being
issued in the interval only upon the special orders of the head of the office.
131. General orders and circulars of the Chief Conservator of Forests,
the Conservators of Forests and the Accountant General.- The
general orders and circulars of the Chief Conservator of Forests, the
Conservators of Forests and the Accountant General will be filed
separately, according to number and date, in a ’Circular File' to which an
alphabetical index shall be attached. If received in duplicate, one copy will
be placed with the record to which it relates. If only one copy be available,
and it has special reference to any case, memorandum of its contents will
be filled therewith.
132. A. Books and Maps
Classification of books- Books in use in 1he Forest Department may
generally be classified under the following categories.
(i) Books on forestry and allied sciences, such as, Silviculture,
Botany, Forest Utilisation, Forest menuration, Engineering, Forest
Planning and Management, Entamology, Forest economics, PaCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

thology, Soil and Moisture conservation, Geology, Forest Floras,
Wildlife management, etc.;
(ii) (a) Forest Acts and Rules, Forest Codes, Forest Manuals, Rules
and Regulations;
(b) Other Codes, Manuals, Rules and Regulations.
(iii) Forest Administration Reports;
(iv) Forest Working Plans;
(v) Forestry Journals, Catalogues, Periodicals, Magazines and other
similar publications in forestry and allied sciences;
(vi) Forest Settlements;
(vii) Dictionaries and tables.
B. Maps that are generally in use in the Forest Department may be
classified under the following heads.
(i) Topo--sheets issued by the Survey of India;
(ii) Settlement maps of each forest or groups of forests;
(iii) Range map;
(iv) Divisional map;
(v) Forest Atlas of the Circle;
(vi)Forest Atlas of the State;
(vii) Working Plan maps;
(viii) Village, Taluk and District maps;
(ix) Map showing forest types;
(x) Stock maps of different species;
(xi) Wildlife distribution map.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

They may be, in black or coloured prints, in different scales, in loose sheets
or mounted on cloth and wall maps or folded into book forms.
133. (1) Purchase and supply of books, periodicals, maps, etc., must be
confined to what is found actually necessary for the public service.
(2) All books, periodicals, maps, etc., procured for any office should be
registered or filed and must not be permanently removed from the office for
which they were intended.
(3) In each office a register of books and a register of maps in Form 21
must be kept separately. The ‘Remarks’ column of the register should be
made use of for indicating the disposal of any book or map and the entries
in this column should be dated and initialed by the officer to whose office
the book or map belongs.
(4) There will be a Forest library at the Chief Conservator Office, in each of
the Circle and Diviional Forest Offices and the Offices of the Silviculturist,
Director of ?Forest Research and Utilisation, Forest Utilisation Officer, and
the Conservator, Wildlife Preservation. The books and maps in the libraries
of the above offices, as well as those of the other offices, should be
carefully kept to ensure their remaining in good order and being easily
found when required for referenre. They should be kept, as far as possible,
in one place and under the custody of one particular clerk, who will be
responsible for their condition and safety. He will make them over to his
successor on being relieved of charge or to the head of the office whenever
they maybe demanded.
(5) No books or maps should be removed from the library or office, as the
case may be, without the permission of the head of the office. When a book
or map is removed, a receipt must invariably be furnished by the officer
removing it and the receipt should be returned to him or cancelled when the
book or map is returned.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(6) Every officer on receiving charge of the office should satisfy himself that
the library or the stock of books and maps is in good condition and, unless
he reports at once that the books and maps are out of order or that any
volumes or maps are missing, it will be assumed that he received the
charge of the library or the stock of books and maps in good order and he
will be personally responsible for any defects which he could have noticed
by inspecting the library or stock of books and maps on his assuming
charge.
(7) The Ministerial head of the office in every- office shall be in overall
responsibility for all books and maps in the office. On the 1st April of each
year, he should take the stock of books and maps and note the result on
the register concerned, bringing to the notice of the head of the office,
cases of loss or damage and any inegu1aritiesin their maintenance for
taking such action as he deems necessary.
(8) Every person who is responsible for the loss or damage of any book or
map shall be liable to pay the actual cost of the book or map or such
compensation for loss or damage, as the case may be, as assessed by the
head of the office, having regard to the circumstances under which the
book or map was lost or damaged, its original price, and the date of its
purchase or supply and the nature and amount of damage.
(9) The controlling officers, during the course of their inspections of the
subordinate offices, should check the actual stock of books and maps and
compare them with the entries in the register of books and maps and take
prompt action in cases of discrepancies. They shall also examine whether
they have been properly maintained under good repair and posted up-todate with all the amendments in respect of Government publications. They
should particularly "see, if all alterations such as, additions or exclusions
from forests, plantations raised new roads formed, coupes worked. etc., are
marked in the maps and take prompt steps to set them right, if not done.
They will also examine adequacy or otherwise of the books and maps in
-the offices they inspect and .m case of any deficiency in requirement take
suitable steps to arrange for their supply.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(10) Periodicals such as forestry publications and bulletins as well as books
which are published in parts must be bound in volumes, which will usually
be yearly. Annual administration reports and similar publications may also,
for convenience of preservation, be bound up in volumes from time to time.
(11) The addenda and corrigenda to Acts, Rules, Codes, Manuals and
other similar publications must be entered in their places immediately on
receipt, the posting of each such amendment being listed on the fly leaf of
each copy of the book concerned, existing in the office. It shall be the
responsibility of the Ministerial head of the office to see that all these
publications are being properly posted up with amendments issued from
time to time. The heads of offices should examine, from time to time, all
copies of these publications maintained in their offices so as to assure
themselves that they are being properly posted up.
(12) The Chief Conservators of Forests are authorised to supply, free of
charge, copies of the Administration reports, Working Plan reports and the
like of the Forest Department to such of the Heads of Forest Departments
of other States as are prepared to reciprocate. If the Department of the
other Government does not agree to exchange, he may obtain or supply,
as the case may be, such publications on payment of cost. For that
purpose, a nominal price of Rs. 10 per copy for each working plan and Rs.
2 per copy of Administration report is fixed.
(13) The Chief Conservators of Forests are authorised to purchase direct
from the Manager, of Publications, Government of India, New Delhi, the
publications of the Government of India required by him, if they are not
being supplied free and if they are required for reference for official purposes.
(14) Copies of the 'Indian Forester' and ‘My Forest' shall be procured by all
the Gazetted Heads of Offices.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Purchase of Books
(15) Rules regulating the purchase of books, powers delegated to officers
in this connection are contained in the Manual of Contingent Expenditure,
1958 and the Manual of Financial Powers, 1959 and subsequent
amendment issued by Government from time to time.
(16) Maps.- (a) All maps superseded by new editions should be destroyed
except three copies which should be clearly marked "Superseded in 19….”
at the top and carefully preserved.
(b) All unmounted maps should be laid flat on the rack and a piece of thick
cardboard of 100 cm. by 70 cm. should be placed on the top of the maps
on each shelf. When copies of more than one sheet are placed on the
same shelf, different sheets should be separated by pieces of thick cardboard and a tag attached "to each set showing what it consists of.
(c) In each Division, the following maps will be maintained and one or more
copies of each should be mounted in book form.
(i) A Divisional Forest reference map on the scale of 4 miles to the
inch or its equivalent in the Metric system showing all Reserved
Forests, Protected Forests, District Forests, Village Forests, Plantations, Roads, cart-tracks, forest buildings, depots, checking
stations, Range divisions and other items affecting administration of
the forests;
(ii) A Range Forest reference map, posted as above, but in greater
detail showing names of hills and streams, Sections and Beats and
the headquarters of Forester in charge of Sections and of Beat
Guards license issuing stations cattle pounds, etc.;
(iii) Separate maps for each Reserved, protected or other forests and
plantations showing topographical features and all enclosures, rights
of way, forest roads, cart-tracks, footpaths, forest buildings, checkposts, compartment and coupe linces, names of hills, streams, etc.
Forests that adjoin one another may, if desirable, be shown in one
and the same sheet;
(iv) Separate working circle maps on such scale as may be suitable in
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

each case.
Note.- In the case of Nos. (ii) and (iii), the scale of the map, may vary
according to requirements, the ordinary scale being 1 and 4 inches to the
mile respectively or its equivalent in Metric system.
(17) The Forest Atlas of the State is compiled from the Divisional Forest
reference maps referred to supra and is kept in the Secretariat. the Office
of the Chief Conservator of Forests, the Superintendent of Forest Surveys,
Dehra Dun and at the offices of the respective Divisional Forest Officers,
Working Plans. Each Conservator of Forests should maintain the Atlas as
far as it relates to his own circle.
(18) It is the duty of the Divisional Forest Officers to see that all alterations
of boundaries, such as additions, exclusions, enclosures, etc., all new
roads and buildings, etc., are promptly entered in the maps at headquarters
from which the camp copies Range and other maps must be posted at
least annually.
(19) The Divisional Forest reference maps should be connected annually
up to 31st March and will be forwarded to the Conservator of the Circle
before the 1st May following, the Atlas in the Conservator's Office will then
be correctly posted and the Divisional maps will be returned. The Conservators should forward the corrected copies of their Atlases to the Chief
Conservator of Forests before the 1st July of each year and the latter
officer will correctly post up the several copies of the Atlas in his office and
the copy kept at the Secretariat.
(20) A coloured copy of each map, mounted on cloth, should be endorsed
"Record copy" and should be kept in the Divisional Forest Office, corrected
up-to-date as and when additions or alterations take place with a note
regarding notification of alteration.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(21) Once every year, copies of all sheets on which alterations have been
carried out during the year should be sent to the Conservator so that he
may post his record copies up-to-date. The copies sent from the Divisional
Forest Officer with not be record copies which must under no
circumstances be removed from their offices.
(22) Rights of way, plantations formed, Working Plan details, etc., should
be specially coloured in the record copy.
(23) The Conservators will annually supply the Superintendents of Forest
Surveys with details of all alterations carried out on the Survey of India
Maps.
(24) The rules governing the purchase of books are applicable mutandis
mutatis to the purchase of maps also.
(25) The Chief Conservator of Forests and the Conservators of Forests are
empowered to sanction purchase of topo-sheets and taluk maps subject to
budget provision.
(26) The procedure to be followed in connection with forest surveys and in
obtaining forest maps are given in Appendix VII.
(27) Periodicals as well as books which are published in parts must be
bound up in volumes, which will usually be yearly. Annual reports and
similar publications, for convenience of preservation, shall also be bound
up in volumes from time to time. A similar procedure will also be adopted in
respect of the proceedings of the Chief Conservators of Forests.
134. Uniform to be worn the executive and protective officers.- The
uniform to be worn while on duty, the pattern prescribed and the conditions
of supply with other particulars are given in Appendix VIIL
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

135. Preserva60n and destruction of records.- A statement showing the
list of records and correspondence which are to be permanently retained
and those showing the number of years after which they could be destroyed is given in Appendix lX. Soon after the close of the financial year,
the heads of offices will examine the records of their offices with a view to
the destruction of those documents and take action accordingly.
136. Transfer between Foresters, Guards and Depot Keepers.- A transfer report in Fonn22 shall be submitted to the Divisional Forest Officer
through the Range Forest Officer in the case of Foresters and Beat Guards
and in Form 6 in the case of Sandalwood timber fuel Bamboo depot keepers.
CHAPTER IV
137. Annual Administration Reports and other Periodical Returns. Each Divisional Forest Officer shall submit to the Conservator of Forests a
brief annual report or statement of progress of his Division for the financial
year ending the 31st March so as to reach him not later than the 31st
August. The report should follow the arrangement of subjects, detail in
Article 141 and such other details as may, from tune to time, be prescribed
by the Chief Conservator of Forests the report should be accompanied by
the annual returns detailed in Article 142 infra and by such other returns as
the Chief Conservators of Forests may direct. The principles laid down and
the instructions contained in Article 140 should be followed in compiling the
administration report. The Divisional Forest Officers, Working plans, the
Forest Utilisation Officer and the Silviculturists shall also submit to their
respective Conservators their annual reports in such form and
accompanied by such returns as the Chief Conservators of Forests may
prescribe
138. The Conservator of Forests shall review the Divisional reports, prepare his own report for the Circle exhibiting in a concise manner the progress of work during the year and submit it to the Chief Conservators of
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Forests so as to reach him and not later than 15th October. 'The report
should follow the arrangement of subjects laid down in Article 141 and in
accordance with the instructions contained in Article 140. The annual returns prescribed in Article 142 should accompany the report.
139. (a) The Chief Conservators of Forests will review the Circle administration reports and from them and other information in his possession will
compile a concise report for the State and submit to Government a typewritten copy of it in duplicate so as to reach them not later than the 15th
December. The report will follow the arrangements of subjects as laid down
in Article 141 and will cover all the important activities of the Department
and particularly those affecting the ryots and the general public. The Report
will be in two parts, Part I containing the Administration report proper and
Part II comprising the annual returns.
(b) The Government will review the administration report of the Department
and send an approved copy of the report with their review to the Director,
Government Printing, Stationery and Publications, Bangalore with
instructions to publish the report and to supply the number of copies of the
report required by the Government formation.
140. In compiling the report, the following principles should be strictly
followed.
(i) The annual administration report is a record of work done and as
such should contain no proposals for future action or complaints
regarding inadequacy of funds, establishment, etc. Such
representations should form the subject of separate reports;
(ii) The report should contain only the explanation of really important
or suggestive variations in the statistics, and the statement of really
noteworthy facts in the history of the Year's administration;
(iii) No mere paraphrasing and 'reproduction of statistics should be
allowed in the report;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(iv) All attempts to offer explanations of variations in the figures which
are not important or unusual should be excluded unless the fact
alleged in explanatory is in itself important enough to demand
mention;
(v) It should be recognised that the more brief a report is the better,
provided it conveys all that is needed for an intelligent comprehension
of the meaning of the facts and figures and of the salient features of
the year's work. Prominence should be given to facts which are likely
to interest the public;
(vi) The body of the report should be almost in a narrative form the
reproduction of tabular statements from the corresponding returns
being avoided. It will occasionally be necessary to introduce tables of
comparative statistics into the narrative, but such tables should be
brief and simple and their number rigidly restricted;
(vii) The number of maps, photographs and diagrams should be restricted and they should be inserted at suitable places in the report; .
(viii) The printing of statistics side-ways on a page should be avoided
as far as possible;
(ix) Pages of tabular matter should not be printed with the columns
left entirely or almost entirely blank;
(x) It is seldom necessary to give in full detail: and in separate columns, in tables of statistics, the corresponding figures for the
preceding year. In most cases, it will be found sufficient to give
corresponding figures for the totals only by means of one additional
line at the foot of the table;
(xi) No criticisms of orders passed by Government should be inserted
in the annual administration reports, and any discussions in
administration reports of the Policy of Government Orders must be
avoided;

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(xii) Care should be taken in the preparation of the reports to avoid
discrepancies between the figures given in the body of the reports
and those given in the corresponding annual returns;
(xiii) Whenever figures relating to various Divisions are furnished,
they should be presented in tabular form;
(xiv) Correct scientific nomenclature of all plants should be employed
in the preparation of the Forest administration reports. As regards the
more generally known trees, plants and products, if the local and not
the scientific name is in common usage, it will suffice to give the
scientific equivalent once or twice when the tree, plant or product is
first alluded to in the report. The scientific name should invariably
follow the local name.
141. The administration report should be arranged in chapters, sections
and sub-sections mentioned below and compiled according to instructions
given under each head.
introduction- lt should only deal in a summary way with the points
contained in the Report. Any special matters not directly connected with the
administration of the forest property of the State, but bearing on it, should
be included in the general remarks.
CHAP'TER I
Constitution of Reserved Forests.
(1) Alteration of area.- This section should give concisely the areas added
or excluded during the year, together with the reasons for additions and
exclusions. The five classes of forests, viz., (1) Reserved forests (2) Protected forests (3) District forests (4) Village forests and (5) Private forests
under the management of the Forest Department should be dealt with.
(2) Forest settlements.- The progress made in Forest settlement should
be recorded. The area finally settled during the year, that under settlement,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the cost of settlement and an estimate of the area still available for settlement together with suggestions for the future should be added.
(3) Demarcation.- The length of new boundary demarcated and the old
boundary repaired and maintained should be noted differentiating external
and internal boundaries. The method employed and the cost per unit length
should be stated. An estimate of length of new demarcation still to be done
should also be mentioned.
(4) Forest surveys.- A short report by the Circle Superintendent, Survey of
India Department, should, where necessary, be entered here followed by a
brief note of local surveys carried out. The section should close with an
estimate of the amount of survey work still outstanding.
CHAPTER II
Management of Reserved Forests
(1) Regulation of management.- (a) Preparation and control of regular
Working Plans.- Under 'preparation' should be mentioned the areas for
which new working plans were sanctioned during the year and the areas for
which working plans were under compilation. In the case of completed
plans, the cost per square kilometre should be recorded. Under 'Control', it
should be mentioned whether the prescriptions of existing plans were carried out; important deviations should be explained and 1he authority therefor stated. Revisions of working plans should next be noted. The subsection should close with an estimate of the area for which working plans
are still required and a list of plans that expire within the next three years.
(b) Preliminary working plan reports.- A brief note of the reports submitted or under compilation should be entered.
(2) Motor vehicles, communications and buildings.-- (a) Motor vehicles.-In this sub-section, different kinds of motor vehicles in charge of the
Department, the new vehicles acquired during the year with their cost and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

the cost of maintenance and repairs of the vehicles should be detailed.
(b) Roads and bridges.- This sub-section includes slides and all other
forms of export lines. The information should be sub-divided under the
heads 'permanent' and 'temporary' works. Details of new roads, bridges,
etc., constructed during the year together with their cost and the cost of
maintenance and repairs of the existing roads should be furnished. If the
works were of some magnitude and importance, details may be given regarding their nature.
(c) Buildings.- Here again, the information given should differentiate
between 'Permanent' and 'temporary' works. Details need only be furnished
in respect of permanent buildings of importance. New buildings,
constructed during the year with their cost and the cost of maintenance,
repairs to and improvements, if any, of old buildings should be detailed in
this sub-section.
(d) Miscellaneous works.- In this sub-section should be noted important
miscellaneous other works executed during the year together with cost.
Details need not be mentioned of works that are not of any importance. In
such cases a statement of the cost incurred with suffice.
(3) Protection of Forests.- (a) General protection.-This sub-section is of
great importance and in it should be compared the total number of forest
offences detected during the year, under the heads (1) injury by fire (2)
unauthorised felling or removal of timber and other produce (3) grazing
offences (4) offences relating to encroachment in forests and (5) other
kinds of offences, with those of the previous year and the average of the
past three years, the reasons for any marked variation in the total being
given. In another paragraph, the number of cases pending disposal at the
beginning of the year, the cases detected during the year, their total, the
cases disposed of during the year and the cases remaining undisposed at
the close of the year should be furnished Circle-wise. In a separate
paragraph, the number of cases compounded, the compensation amount
realised, the value of produce confiscated, the value recovered of the
produce released should be noted circle-wise. In another paragraph, the
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

number of cases taken, to Court should be considered together with the
percentage of convictions obtained and the nature of punishments inflicted
by the Magistracy in important cases. The sub-section should close with
remarks as to undetected cases.
(b) Unauthorised felling and removal of forest produce.- In this subsection, offences of the kind should be classified under (i) timber (ii)
Sandal wood (iii) fire wood (iv) bamboos and (v) Minor Forest Produce. The
increase or decrease in offences under this head should be compared with
those of the past year and measures taken to reduce illicit felling and
misappropriation of forest produce and the causes thereof should be
explained.
(c) Special protection staff.- In this sub-section, the work carried out by
the Special protection staff namely mobile squads and other
establishments employed exclusively for the prevention of smuggling of
timber., sandal wood and other forest produce should be dealt with. The
number of such establishments, the cases detected by them during the
year compared with those of the previous year should also be mentioned
with results.
(d) Injury by fire and protection from fire.-The number of cases of fire
offences observed during the year and the reasons for the increase or decrease of fire offences with those of the previous year should be explained
Measures employed for protection of forests from fire should be briefly
mentioned in a separate para. "The area successfully protected from fire
and its percentage in respect of the total forest area should be noted. The
figures of areas protected should not include forest areas which enjoy
natural immunity from fire as they do not give indication of the success
attained by continued precautions. What is required is the most reliable
information obtainable which will afford some indication of the extent of
forests susceptible to forest fires for which continuous protection is
desirable and the proportion of such forest which has been protected by
departmental efforts. Hence, a statement as to the area attempted for
protection and the area actually protected should be noted in this subsection. Areas as are naturally immune should be shown separately.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

In a separate paragraph under this sub-section the original fires should be
considered under the following heads.(i) Those originating in departmental fire conservancy operations;
(ii) Those originating externally and crossing over external fire lines;
(iii) Those originating inside the forest by carelessness or accident by
outsiders;
(iv) Those originating inside the forest by intention or malice;
(v) Those due to unknown causes.
The sub-section should end with a statement of cost of fire protection
(e) Unauthorised grazing and protection from cattle.- The sub-section
should commence with a statement as to the extent of forest area open to
cattle grazing, the area closed to grazing and the percentage of the former
to the whole forest area. The number of grazing offences detected, during
the year should be compared with those of the previous year and the variations explained. The number of cattle impounded as compared with the
average of the past three' years should be noted and reasons given for any
marked change in these numbers. The injury done by cattle, the means
taken to prevent such injury and their results should be recorded. The total
number of different kinds of cattle admitted to graze, the amount of grazing
fees, if any, collected and any special steps taken for the improvement of
fodder and pasturage in forest areas should be given.
(f) Encroachments in forests.-In this sub-section, offences of the kind
should be classified under (i) Reserved forest and (ii) District and protected
forests. The extent of encroachment under each kind of forests at the
beginning of the year, the area encroached or found to have been
encroached during the year, the area evicted of encroachments and the
area of encroachments dis-afforested during the year, the balance area
remaining encroached at the close of the year and the measures taken to
obtain evictions should be given reasons for decrease or increase of such
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

offences compared with the previous year should also be noted.
(g) Other offences.-The nature of the offences, the number of offences
detected under each sum kind together with reasons for increase or decrease in number compared With the past year should be noted.'
(h) Protection against injuries from natural causes.- The more common
injuries and damage to forest crops and forest produce and the measures
taken to prevent such injuries and damages may be dealt with under the
following heads.
(i) Virus, bacteria and fungus diseases;
(ii) Vegetable pests including creepers, climbers, loranthus, prickly
pear, lantana, eupatorium, etc.;
(iii) Animal pests including rats, rabbits, hare porcupines, birds, reptiles, monkeys, Deer, Sambhar, Bison, Elephants, Wild Boars, etc.;
(iv) Insect pests, including Teak-defoliators and other insects, locusts,
grasshoppers, crickets, termites, etc.;
(v) Other causes, such as severe drought, frost, floods, cyclones,
thunderstorms, erosion, etc.
CHAPTER III
Silviculture
(1) System of Management- Under this section, tabular statement
showing the total areas of forests worked under each system of management should ,be given viz., (i) Clear-felling, (ii) Selection felling, (iii) Selection-cum-improvement, (iv) Simple coppice (v) Coppice with standards or
reserves (vi) Sandal and (vii) Bamboo Working.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(2) General progress of regeneration and afforestation.- This section
will describe all ,areas under regeneration under three main heads, viz.
A. Mainly natural.
B. Mainly artificial.
C. Afforestation.
Under A. 'Mainly natural' ,there will be two sub-heads, viz., (i) concentrated
and (ii) not concentn1ted. Regeneration in coupes under simple coppice or
coppice with standards of reserve method of working will constitute
'concentrated regeneration while regeneration in forests worked under the
selection or improvement systems, and canopy lifting will fall under 'not
concentrated'. 'B. Mainly artificial' will include all plantation works under
taken to replace tree-growth removed by fellings and the replacement of
which is not obtained by natural regeneration e.g., concentrated plantations
of Teak, Eucalyptus, Casuarina, Softwoods, Cashew and other species of
economic importance.
C. Afforestation' will deal with creation of new forest crops where there
was little or no forest growth, e.g., afforestation of arid areas, bare-hillocks
and eroded slopes to check soil erosion by contour trenching, sowing and
planting. The technique of afforestation adopted, area dealt with, species
Iaised, expenditure Incurred and the results obtained should be de~ in
brief. The details of irrigated and mechanised plantations shall be
separately given.
(3) Forest nurseries.-In this section,. the extent of permanent and temporary nurseries raised, an approximate estimate of the different seedlings
obtained therefrom and the number of seedlings made use of for local
planting and those supplied to others together with the cost incurred and
the revenue, if any, realised should be noted.
(4) Seed collection.-Seeds of various species collected, those purchased
from outside, quantities used for direct sowing and for raising nurseries and
quantities supplied to other including supplies made outside the State
together with the cost incurred and the revenue Iealised should be noted.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(5) Tending of the growing stock.-This section should deal with the usual
cultural operations, such as weedings, hoeings, cutting back operations
climber-cutting, felling or girdling of worthless species, cleanings, thinnings,
canopy lifting, de. The operations carried out should be separately shown
for (i) areas under concentrated regeneration and (ii) areas not under
concentrated regeneration.
CHAPTER IV
Forest Utilization
(1) System of management.- General.-Areas worked for major forest
produce, such as timber, firewood, sandalwood, bamboos, etc., under the
various methods of exploitation classed under the headings clear felling,
selection, simple coppice, coppice with standards or reserves,
improvement fellings and unregulated fellings should be stated and any
reasons for increase or decrease of the areas operated on should be
explained, The system of disposal of minor forest produce should be stated
here along with efforts, if any, made to increase the utilisation of minor
forest products. The method for regulating grazing in forests should also be
dealt here.
(2) Agency of exploitation.- (i) By Government agency.-The sub-section
should be considered under different produce exploited, viz., timber
including sleepers and sawn material, sandalwood, firewood and charcoal,
bamboos, minor forests products, ivory, etc. The quantities extracted, their
transport, depot arrangements, sales and supplies, etc. should be briefly
described. Mechanical skidding, conversion of timber in the Departmental
Saw Mills and the seasoning and treatment of timber in Plants should also
be mentioned in this sub-section.
(ii) By private agency..,-(a) Quantities of the different major and minor
forest products exploited by contractors and lease holders and the revenue
obtained there from should be explained under this sub-section.
(b) Quantities of different kinds of forest produce removed by purchasers
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

and consumers on permit or license system and the revenue derived
therefrom should be noted under this sub-section.
(c) Different kinds of forest produce removed by right and privilege holders
and those granted free or at concessional rates should be mentioned in this
sub-section, with explanations as to any increase or decrease in demand
as well as the means taken to permit the proper exercise of rights and
privileges without damage to the forests. The estimated quantity or value of
removals and the value foregone by the department should be stated under
each of the heads-:.-timber, firewood, bamboos, grass and grazing and
other minor forest produce.
(iii) Gross yield and out-turn- In this sub-section, a summary of forest
produce by volume, quantity or value extracted by whatever agency should
be given.
CHAPTER V
Forest Industries and Corporations
(1) The Karnataka State Forest Industries Corporation Limited.- The
annual working and details including the financial results shall be given.
(2) The Karnataka Forest Plantation Corporation limited - The physical
extent of plantation covered, annual details of works done and financial
results should be given. Wood Seasoning Kilns, etc., should be explained
together with their outturn, expenditure and profit or loss.
(3) Industries dependent on the Forest Department for raw materials.In this section, the more important of the forest-based industries both in the
public and private sector, the kinds and quantities of raw materials drawn
by them, the revenue realised from these sources compared with the
figures of the past year and further scope, if any, for the establishment of
new industries on the availability of any particular raw material in abundance maybe explained.
CHAPTER VI
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Financial Results
(1) Revenue. – The revenue allotted for the year and that realized should
be state, explaining reasons for any appreciable variations.
In another paragraph, the revenue of the year should be compared with
those of the previous three years and important factors, if any, contributing
to large variations should be explained.
An analysis should then be made in a tabular statement, the details of
revenue realized during the year under each budget head against the allotment, furnishing explanations for large variation between the allotment and
actual realisation.
In a separate paragraph, the revenue outstandings of the year showing the
demand, collection and balance should be noted, stating reasons for items
of heavy outstanding.
(2) Expenditure.- The total expenditure under all heads, viz., Conservancy
and Works, Developmental schemes and Establishment should be stated
against the allotment and compared with those of the past three years.
A tabular statement of expenditure under various heads under
establishment. Conservancy and Works and Schemes under Five Year
Plans should be added indicating the allotments made. Variations between
the allotments and the actual expenditure should be explained wherever
necessary.
(3) Net Revenue.-The net revenue surplus of the year should be stated
and compared with that of the previous year.
(4) Forest advances.- The position afforest advances for works during the
year should be briefly explained in this section.
CHAPTER VII
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Administration
(1) A brief account of the charges held by the Class I Officers of the
Department should be given in this section.
(2) New Gazetted posts sanctioned, if any, during the year should be noted
in this section quoting the relevant Government Orders sanctioning such
posts.
(3) Appointments and promotions in the Gazetted cadres should be furnished in this section.
(4) A list of Gazetted Officers of the Department in foreign service on
deputation during the year and those reverted to the Department from the
Foreign Service should be furnished in this section.
(5) Forest Education.-(i) List of IFS probationers and KFS probationers
deputed for training in the Diploma Course of Forestry at the Indian Forest
College, Dehra Dun may be given in this sub-section.
(ii) Names of officers deputed for specialised postgraduate studies and
study tours in foreign countries may be mentioned in this sub-section.
(iii) The number of candidates deputed for Ranger's training in the Southern
Forest Ranger's Colleges, Coimbatore may be given in this sub-section.
(iv) The working of the Foresters and Guards Training Schools and the
number of candidates trained therein during the year may be noted in this
sub-section.
(6) (i) List of casualities and requirements of Gazetted Officers of the
Department may be noted in this sub-section.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(ii) A tabular statement showing the number of subordinates retired, died or
resigned may be furnished in this sub-section.
(7) A statement showing the various kinds of punishments inflicted on
officers and subordinate establishment of the Department should be furnished in this section.
(8) A brief account of the temporary establishment freshly created during
the year and that continued from the previous year may be summarised in
this section.
CHAPTER VIII
Research and Experiments
In this chapter, a brief summary of the research and experiments carried by
the Department, their objects, progress and results achieved together with
their contribution in the advancement of scientific management of forests
may be given. It is not necessary to go into the statistical details of each
item of research or experiment and it would suffice to mention the nature of
experiment the object aimed at the conclusions, if any, arrived at.
Research work and experiments carried out in each of the territorial Circles
by the territorial Officers and those carried out by the Silviculturist and
Forest Utilisation Officer may be shown separately.
CHAPTER IX
Development Schemes under Five Year Plans
In this section, various schemes sanctioned for the year, the physical and
financial targets fixed may be enumerated under the following groups..
(a) State Sector Forestry Schemes;
(b) Central Sector Schemes;
(c) Centrally sponsored Schemes;
(d) State Sector Other Schemes like 64 famine relief, CADA, etc.;
(e) Schemes of special nature like World Bank, CARE, etc.
CHAPTER X
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Welfare activities of Backward Classes, Scheduled Gasses and
Scheduled Tribes
This chapter should summarise measures taken to help the above classes
to improve their economic conditions, such as.
(i) Free or concessional grant of timber fabricated doors and windows, bamboos, etc., for construction of dwelling houses, 'huts, etc.;
(ii) Release of lands from forests for house sites, cottage industries,
etc.;
(iii) Lease of land for Cumri and other forms of cultivation on Agri-Silvi
basis;
(iv) Free or concessional grant of bamboos, canes, tanning materials,
etc.; for cottage industries;
(v) Grant of contracts and leases for the exploitation of forest produce
to Forest Co-operative societies of the tribals and other forest
dwellers;
(vi) Maintenance of tribal schools and forest dispensaries for the
benefit of the tribals and other forest dwellers; and
(vii) The extent of employment provided to the weaker sections as
forest labour in various works of the department;
(viii) A general note on Forest tribes and hill tribes and their allocations may be given. For example the position of Jenukuruba,
Kadukuruba, Hakkipikki. Sholigars and their extent of involvement in
Forest operations shall be briefly narrated.
CHAPTER XI
Wildlife Preservation
(1) (a) National parks Wildlife Sanctuaries and Birds Sanctuaries.- A
brief account of the various Wildlife Sanctuaries and National Parks maintained by the Department and the fresh Sanctuaries and parks, if any,
added on during the year should be given.
(b) The number of Wildlife Preservation and shooting Blocks maintained by
the Department during the year may be stated in this sub-section.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(2) A summary of improvements effected in the sanctuaries for the benefit
of the Wildlife and the facilities provided for the tourists and visitors to go
round the sanctuaries should be given in. this section.
(3) Measures taken to preserve WildIife.
(a) Issue of Game Licences and Block Licenses and the revenue
realised;
(b) Game offences detected.
(4) Havoc caused by wild animals and the measures taken to combat such
a havoc.
(5) Capture of wild animals during the year, their disposal and revenue
realised.
(6) Celebration of Wildlife Week.
(7) The number of tourists and visitors, visiting the different sanctuaries and
the revenue derived from this source.
In this section may be mentioned the visits of distinguished persons and
V.I.Ps.
(8) Meetings of the State Board and Indian Board for Wildlife. .
(9) Bannerghatta National Park.
(10) Project Tiger Bandipur.
(11) Crocodile breeding and development.
(12) Zoos.-(a) Major Zoo.
(b) Minor Zoo.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

CHAPTER XII
Miscellaneous
(1) Management of Private Forests.- A brief account of the several Private forests under the management of the Department, the important operations carried out in them may be given in this section together with an
account of total revenue and expenditure.
(2) Village Forests.- The total area of village forests may be given under
the headings, viz., (1) Under the management to Village Panchayats and
(2) Under the management of the Department. Measures taken to improve
the condition of the village forests and an overall pictureof1he management
of the village forests in the State should be furnished in this section.
(3) District Forests and Unreserves.- Measures taken by the Department
to takeover the management and control of the District forests and the
other un-reserves, the progress made in this behalf and an estimate of area
still available for taking over may be given in this section.
(4) Lease of Forest lands.- Total area of forest lands leased out for various purposes and the amount of the rental realised compared with those of
the past year may be given in this section.
(5) Livestock.- An account of the Departmental elephants, showing the
number existing at the beginning of the year, the number captured and
added on during the year, the number gifted, sold or died during the year
and the number remaining at the close of 'the year may be given in this
section.
(6) Exhibitions.- Various exhibitions in which the Department participated
and the awards and appreciations, if any, obtained for any of the exhibits,
may be recorded in this section.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(7) Vanamahotsava.- A brief account of the activities of the Department in
the annual celebration of Vanamahotsava, including the quantity of seedlings and seeds supplied, lectures and radio-talks organised, pamphlets
and posters issued may be given in this section along with an estimated
assessment. of survivals of Vanamahotsava plantings and sowings in
forest areas.
(8) Tree-planting in forest areas.- Total area of forests granted on san ad
for planting of fruit trees and the area resumed for the failure on the part of
the Sanad-holder to fulfill the terms of the Sanad maybe given in this
section.
(9) Floods, famine, Fire and Fodder scarcity.- Relief works undertaken
by the Department by way of providing employment to agricultural labour,
grazing and fodder facilities, liberalized and the departmental collection and
supply of fodder and grass during the period of floods, famine, fire havoc
may be briefly described in this section.
(10) Forest Labour and Wages.- An approximate estimate of the labour
employed in forest operations (felling, conversion, extraction, regeneration,
protection, roads and buildings) and in forest industries maybe stated to
give an idea of the extent .of employment, the forest works afford to people.
The average wages of for a labour, the difficulties experienced, if any, in
getting labour for forest works and the manner in which they could overcome may be mentioned.
(11) Conferences and Meetings.- Important meetings and conferences in
which the department participated during the year maybe mentioned in
this section.
(12) A special note of State Forestry Advisory Board shall be given.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(13) General and conclusion.- Special matters of interest which do not fall
under any of the previous heads and which are of sufficient public interest
may be mentioned in this section.
142. Quinquennial Report- Once in five years, conforming to 5 years
plans, a Report showing summary of the progress of forest administration
of the State and furnishing a retrospect of the events and changes of the
past five years, as clearly and concisely as possible, the directions in which
the forest policy is tending and the extent to which the general principles of
the State Forest Policy as laid down in consonance with the Forest Policy
of the Government of India has been carried out should be submitted and
also added as a Chapter in the administration report of the concerned year.
The Conservators of Forests will submit similar reports to the Chief Conservator of Forests along with their annual reports to facilitate the latter Officer
to consolidate the report with his review.
143. Annual Returns.-(l) The following returns will accompany the annual
administration report. These returns should be in the prescribed forms. Any
other return that may be inserted should be strictly limited to the illustration
of important points mentioned in the report. Fraction of rupees, square
kilometres, hectares, cubic metres, metric tonnes, etc., if half and above
will be taken as full rupee, square-kilometer, hectare, cubic metre or metric
tonne, as the case may be, if less than half, they will be omitted.
(2) Form 23 Parts I and II (Areas of Reserved, Protected. District, Village and other classes of Forests).- Part I will show the area in charge of
the Forest department and part II, that in-charge of the Revenue and other
Departments. The areas of several classes of forests should be shown
separately for each Division, the totals given for each Circle and the State.
(3) Form 24 (Progress made in forest settlement).- Figures in Column 4
should tally with Column 7 of the previous year's corresponding table.
Column 6 should show only that much of the area which has been actually
settled during the year. Totals for the circles are sufficient and they need
not be given by Divisions. Figures in Column 9 may be worked on the basis
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

of the forest area finally settled and expenditure incurred thereon during the
year. .
(4) Form 25 (Record of Demarcation and Maintenance of Boundaries).
-Boundaries include, besides the outer perimeter, the limits of enclosures of
private or other lands within the forests, but not the limits of Sub Divisions,
such as blocks, compartments, coupes, etc. The lengths of boundaries of
forests finally notified should alone be shown in this return. The figures in
each column should be total for the Circles and need not be given by
Divisions. The following points should be observed.
(i) Total of Columns 3 and 4 should tally with Column 5 of the
previous year's corresponding table;
(ii) Column 5 should be equal to the sum of Columns 2,3 and 4;
(iii) Column 8 should be equal to the sum of Columns 5,6 and 7;
(iv) The Column 6 should not include any boundaries which do not
require demarcation as they will be shown in Column 7. Where
surveys have not been completed, the entries in Columns 6 and 7
must be estimated.
(v) Cost of demarcation under Column 9 should be the expenditure
on boundaries artificially demarcated during the year as given in
Column 2. Figures in Column 10 should be expenditure incurred on
the repairs of previously existing boundaries as shown in Column 3.
(5) Form 26 (Areas of forests surveyed with topographical details up
to end of the year under report).-This form should be used as a record of
local surveys and those made by the Survey of India. Figures in Column 4
should tally with the figures in Column 6 of the corresponding table of the
previous year. Figures in Column 7 should be the percentage of Column 6
to Column 3. Figures may be furnished for Circles and not by Divisions.
(6) Form 27 (Progress made in Working Plan).-The figure in Column 2
should tally with the figure in Column 5 of the previous year's corresponding table.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

The figure in Column 5 should be equal to the sum of figures in Column 2
and 3, minus figure in Column 4. The figure in Column 10 should tally with
the figure in Column 9 of Form 23 (Part I). The expenditure in Column 14
should agree with the figure shown under the head 'Working Plan' in Form
41.
This form should be prepared by Divisions and for each class of forests
separately.
(7) Form 28 (Expenditure on Communications and Buildings).- The
expenditure (on new works and repairs) shown in this Form on (1) buildings
(2) roads, paths, bridges, etc., and (3) other works should tally with the
expenditure in Form 41 under the relevant detailed heads under "Communications and Buildings" (plus any expenditure on the corresponding subheads of Capital outlay on forests). Figures may be given in totals for the
Circles and not by Divisions.
(8) Form 29 (Breaches of Forest Law and Rules).- Figures in Column 3
should agree with those of Column 17 of the previous year's corresponding
table.
Figures in Column.9 should be equal to the sum of Columns 4 to 8.
Figures in Column 15 should be equal to the sum of Columns 11 and 13.
Figures in Column 16 should be equal to the sum of Column 15.
Against C No. figures need be given under Columns 3 and 11 to 17.
Figures should be given in totals for the Circles and not by Divisions.
(9) Form 30 (Area of forests protected from fire).-Figures in Column 9
against grand total should tally with the figure shown against the item 'Fireprotection' in Form 41.The form should show figures by Divisions.
(10) Form 31 (Causes of forest fires).-Figures in Column 16 should be
equal to the sum of figures in Columns 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 14.
Figures in Column 17 should be equal to 1he sum of figures in Columns 3,
5, 7, 9, 11,13 and 15.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Figures in Column 16 should agree with the total number of cases of forest
fires noted in Form 30. The figures should be given by Divisions.
(11) Form 32 (Area of forest dosed and open to grazing).-Figures in
Column 7 should be equal to the sum of Columns 2 to 6; and should tally
with Column 9 of Form 23.
Figures should be given by Circles.
(12) Form 33 (Return of Grazing in Government Forests)'- Figures should
be given by Divisions.
(13) Form 34 (Progress made in concentrated regeneration and afforestation}.-This should be shown in the parts. Part I will deal with non-plan
progress, and Part II with Plan Progress. Each Part have two sub-parts: (A)
as per working Plans, (B) outside working Plan. Column 2 includes all parts
of periodic blocks I in process of natural regeneration.
Column 3 should show all copies coupes felled during the year.
Column 4 should include all those plantations first formed during the year.
Column 5 should include lands artificially converted to Forest during the
year. Column 6 should tally with the sum of Columns 2, 3, 4 and 5.
Column 7 should include all costs of obtaining and of tending natural or
artificial young crops and should be equal to the total expenditure under
budget sub-head E. sowings, plantings and reproduction (Plus any
expenditure under the corresponding detailed heads of P. Schemes of five
year plan).
The figures should be given in Circle tota1s only.
(14) Form 35 (Outturn of timber sandalwood firewood charcoal and
bamboos) during the year under report and the agency of
exploitation).Circle total should be given for each class of forests
separately. It is not necessary to show separate figures for the several
methods of treatment adopted in exploitation.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Pulp wood Plywood, matchwood etc., should be shown separately and
distribute from other classes of timber.
(15) Form 36 (Out-turn of Minor-Forest Produce including Grass and
Grazing and the agency of exploitation).-0utturn for each class of forest
should be shown separately.
Only important items of Minor Forest Produce should be shown separately
and the rest in one entry under the head Miscellaneous. The Chief
Conservator of Forests will fix the different items of M.F.P. required to be
shown separately.
Grass and Grazing receipts should invariably be shown separately.
Each kind of produce should be shown wherever possible by both quantity
and value. Where quantities cannot be furnished, only value may be
shown. The value of Minor Forest Produce exploited by Government
agency and the value of Minor Forest Produce and the value of grass and
Grazing by purchasers should agree respectively with the amounts shown
under the corresponding sub-heads of revenues in Form 41. Figures
should be given by Circles and Divisional figures need not be given.
(16) Form 37 (Account of tiger and other produce cut or connected by
Government agency and brought to Depots, sold locally or otherwise
disposed of.-Figures should be given for (i) Timber (with separate figures,
if available, for Teak, Rosewood, Other kinds, poles and ballies, Sleepers
and sawn material), (ii) Firewood, (iii) Charcoal, (iv) Sandalwood, (v)
Bamboos and (vi) Other Minor Forest produce. Figures in Column 4 should
agree with figures in Column 8 of the corresponding form of the previous
year. Figures in Column 5, in case of timber, firewood, charcoal, bamboos
and Sandalwood should tally with the corresponding figures shown under
'Government Agency' in Form 35 and those in case of Minor Forest Produce, et, should tally with the corresponding figure shown under 'Government agency' in Form 37.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Figures should be given by Divisions, an abstract of Circle total being given
at the end of each Circle, and an abstract of State-total being given at the
end.
(17) Form 38 (An annual abstract statement showing the quantity of
rough Sandalwood collected at the depots, issues of rough wood for
preparation and the outturn of good wood shall be given in this form).
- Figures should be given for each Circle.
(18) Form 39. (An annual abstract of receipts. and issue of assorted
Sandalwood including white-wood shall be given in this form.-Figures
should be given for each circle. Figures should be furnished separately for
(i) Assorted good wood and (ii) White Chips.
(19) Form 40 (Annual abstract showing the value of the Live and Dead
stock: Figures should be given for each Circle. Livestock should be dealt
separately under (1) Elephants and (2) Other live-stock.
Under Dead-stocks, figures should be furnished separately for (i) buildings,
(ii) Vehicles, (Hi) Tractors, (iv) boats and (v) other articles of stores, too and
plant (with separate figures for each class). Figures under the heading
"Stores, tools-and plant” should agree with the figures in Columns 9 and 10
respectively of the corresponding form of the previous year.
(20) Form. 41 (Annual summary of Revenue and Expenditure).-This
form shall be in two parts viz., (1) Part A and (2) Part B. The figures should
agree with the year's totals under each detailed head in the summary of
Revenue and Expenditure supplied by the Accountant General.
Part A.- Summary of Revenue and Expenditure of the different Circles and
the Direction Office. Figures of Revenue and Expenditure for each Circle
and Direction Office should be given separately under the several detailed
heads of Revenue and Expenditure. Totals for each sub-head and minorCENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

head should also be given.
Part B.- Summary of Revenue and Expenditure of the different Divisions
and the Circle Offices.
Figures of revenue and Expenditure for each Division andCircle office
should be given separately under the several detailed heads of Revenue
and Expenditure. Totals for each sub-bead, rninor-head and the totals for
each Circle should also be given. The Circle totals of Revenue and
Expenditure should tally with the corresponding Circle figures in Part A.
(21) Form 42 (Revenue received and outstandings on account of
Revenue).-Figures of Column 3 should agree with figures of Column 70 of
the corresponding form of the previous year.
Figures in Column 5 should be equal to the sum of figures in Columns 3
and 4.
The amount shown in Column 6 should agree with the net revenue shown
in Form 41.
The figures in Column 7 should be equal to the difference between figures
in Columns 5 and 6. Reasons for heavy outstandings should be indicated in
the Remarks column.
(22) Form 43 (Statement showing forest advances outstanding against
contractors and disbursers).- Figures should be given separately for contractors and disbursers for each Division.
Figures in Column 2 should tally with figures in Column 7 of the corresponding form of the previous year.
Figures in Column 4 should be equal to the sum of figures in Columns 2
and 3.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Figures in Column 7 should be equal to figures in column 4 minus figures in
Column 5.
Figures in Column 6 should agree with figures in Column 7 and in case of
discrepancies between the two, they should be explained in the Column 8
and action taken to reconcile the two figures.
Column 8 should be made use of for explaining, reasons for heavy out
standings of advances, if any, and the action taken for the recovery.
(23) An annual abstract of the Account Current.- This form will be
furnished to the Chief Conservator of Forests by the Accountant General.
(24) Form 44 (Statement showing the Game Licenses issued, and Wild
animals shot).- Figures in Column 12 should be equal to the sum of Columns 5 to II.
144. (1) Each Forest Office should maintain standing list of all periodical
reports and returns robe submitted by it, as prescribed in this code Manual
Forest Accounts Code, Circular Orders of the Chief Conservator of Forests,
Publications of Government and executive orders of Government.
(I) Name of report on return;
(2) Date of submission;
(3) To whom to be submitted;
(4) Authority for submission;
(5) Remarks.
As soon as a fresh order is issued prescribing a new report or return, or
cancelling an existing one, the list should be corrected accordingly and kept
up-to-date. The head of the office should see that the reports and returns
are submitted punctually and take steps in advance for the connection of
the information or statistics required for their preparation, to avoid delay in
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

submission. Inspecting officers should see that the list is correctly maintained and acted upto.
(2) A similar list should be maintained in each office of reports and returns
due to it from subordinate and other offices, for watching their punctual
submission and facilitating issue of reminders in case of delay.
145. Summary of salient features of administration report.- The Chief
Conservator will prepare and submit in manuscript to Government, not later
than the 5th January a summary of the salient features of the administration of the Forest Department for the preceding calendar year. The
summary will be prepared in a manner such as to be of interest and value
both to officials and to the public; all mention of details figures should be
avoided as far as possible.
146. Fire arms.- (1) The required number of guns will be supplied periodically by the Chief Conservator of Forest (GI). The guns and ammunition
forma part of the equipment and must be accounted for in the stores
register. No license is required to be obtained from the District Magistrate
for possession of guns by the Department as it is meant for official use.
However, intimation to the concerned District Magistrate shall be given
about the movement of fire, arms, ammunition etc., and the places of storage. No guns or ammunition shall be transferred from one division to another or from one circle to another without the express orders of the Chief
Conservator of Forests (General).
(2) A register of-firearms and ammunition supplied by Government to
officers as part of their equipment is maintained. in the office of the Chief
Conservator and. transfers of musket as they occur are noted in it. An annual return specifying the several subordinates who were in possession of
the muskets during the previous calendar year with information regarding
the necessity for such distribution should be submitted by the Chief Conservator to reach Government by the 1st February.
(3) To enable the Chief Conservator to submit the above return all
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Conservators and the Divisional Forest Officers under the direct control of
the Chief Conservator should maintain a list in their offices, showing the
distribution of muskets (a copy of the annual return) and submit it after
annual verification to reach the Chief Conservator not later than 16th
January. The Conservators will arrange to get in time similar retumsfrom
their subordinate officers.
147. Departmental Hammers and Stamps.- The various types of
hammers and the details regulating its use. dc., are given in the Appendix
X. A register showing the stock position J111d distributions of hammers
shall be maintained in each division, ~le, and Range Officer in Form 45.
148. By the 30th June of each year Conservator of Forests, Forest Research and Utilisation Circle, will submit to the Chief Conservator of Forests
(Genl.), a report on Silviculture, Utilisation and Economic Research for the
preceding year. The Chief Conservator of Forests (Gen!.) will forward this
report to the President F.R.I. and Colleges, Dehradun after re-editing it if
necessary, so as to reach him by the 15th July sending simultaneously to
Government a copy of the report for their information.
149. Regarding supply of stationery articles, drawing materials, typewriters,
Rubber stamps, forms, Registers and Government Publications, the Forest
Officers will refer to the Manual of Contingent Expenditure, 1958, and the
rules framed by Government in Order No. FD-10-75-UPS-57, dated 15th
December, 1960 and subsequent order issued from time to time.
CHAPTER V
Inspection of Offices
150. The scale of inspection of various offices of the Department at different levels is fixed as follows –

General Wing

Development Wing

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

Name of
the
Inspectin
g
Officer

Office to
be
inspected
annually

(1) All
(a) Chief
Conservato
Conservat
rs of
or of
Forests
Forest (GI)
Offices
Conservato
r of Forest
Research
and
Utilisation
office.
Conservato
rs of
Forests
Wildlife
Preservatio
n Offices.
(2) One
Divisional
Office in
each circle
during a
year.
(3) Two
Squads
Offices
during a
year

Remarks

Name of
the
Inspectin
g
Officer

Offices to
be
inspected
annually

Remarks

Detailed
Inspectio
ns
annually.

(1) All
Special
conservator
Chief
s of Forests
Conservat
offices in
or of
the
Forests
Developme
(Dev.)
nt Wing
Annually

Detailed
Inspectio
ns
annually.

-do-

-do-

(2) One
Divisioanal
Forest
-doOffice in
each Circle

-do-

(3) One
Range
Office in
each circle

-do-

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(b)
Conservat
or of
Forests

(4) One
subdivisional
Office
under
Wildlife
wing every
year and
Mysore zoo
biannually.
(5) One
Forest
Depot at
Random in
the state.
(6)
Sandalwoo
d Depot
attandum in
the state
(1) All
Divisional
Offices,
Squads and
subdivisional
offices
under their
control
once a year
except
those
inspected
by the Chief
Conservato
r of Forests

-do-

-doDetailed
Inspectio
n
annually.

All
Divisional

Detailed

(b)
Offices
Inspectio
Conservat under their ns
or of
control
annually.
Forests. once a year
except
those
inspected
or in detail
by the
Special
Chief
Conservato
r of Forests
(Dev.)

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(GI)
(2) One
Range,
One
Sandalwoo
d Depot
and one
Depot office
in each
Division in
a year other
than those
inspected
by the Chief
Conservato
r of Forests
(GI)

-do-

(c)
Conservat
or of
Forests
Research
and
Utilisation
Code

All units
under his
control
every year.

Detailed
Inspectio
ns
annually.

(d)
Conservat
or of
Forests
wildlife
preservati
on

All units
under his
control
except
those
inspected
by the Chief
Conservato
r of Forests
(General)
Every year.

-do-

(2) One
Range
Cursory
office every
month.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

(e)
Conservat
or of
Forest
Officer

All subDivisional
offices,
Ranges,
Forest
Depots,
Sandal
Depots,
Wood
Preservatio
n plant,
seasoning
kilns, saw
mills
section in
their
jurisdictions
except
those
inspected
by the
conservator
of Forests
or Chief
Conservato
r of Forests
every year.

(f) Range
Forest
Officer’s

All sections
and beats.

-do-

Divisional
Forest
Officer

All Range
Forest
Offices
once a
year.

-do-

Range
Forest
Officer’s

All sections
-doand beats

Detailed
Inspectio
ns
annually.

151. The scale of inspections fixed as above is the barest minimum and it
is always open to the Inspecting Officers who have adequate time at their
disposal to exceed this minimum. These inspections should be supplemented by surprise checks and visits.
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

152. A regular programme of inspections should be chalked out and the
offices to be inspected intimated in advance. The programme of
inspections should be related to financial year commencing from April and
ending at March next year. The process should begin with the Chief
Conservator of Forests who will fix his programme of inspections and
inform the Conservator of Forests and Divisional Forest Officers, so that
they in their turn adjust their inspections suitably. This process will go on to
the level of the lowest Inspecting Officer. The entire programme of
inspections for the year should be so chalked out as to include -the
maximum number of offices in the same visit, as far as possible, instead of
paying special visits each time for inspecting a single office.
153. All heads of officers should inspect their own offices periodically and
see that they are functioning properly and efficiently. All such inspections
should be done l-y themselves and not by their deputies or assistants.
154. The Chief Conservator of Forests should complete inspection of his
office before the end of January and submit a copy of the inspection report
to Government before the end of February.
155. The questionnaires prescribed will be in two parts, namely Part 'A' and
Part 'B'., The former, i.e., Part A is common for all offices and the
questionnaire in Part B is prescribed separately for offices at various levels.
Inspection Report questionnaire in Part A is embodied in Appendix XI. Part
B of the questionnaire of the Inspection Report for the inspection of the
Conservator's Office is given in Appendix XII and that of the Office of the
Divisional Forest Officer in Appendix XIIl, Part B Questionnaire for the
inspection of the Sub-division or Range Office is contained in Appendix
XIV. Questionnaire for the inspection of timber depots is embodied in
Appendix XV and that of Sandalwood depots m Appendix XVI.
These questionnaires should not be considered as including an exhaustive
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

or comprehensive list of questions according to which inspection should be
conducted. Only some of the salient points to, which an Inspecting Officer
should direct his attention are given. It is not intended that inspection
should be mechanical or strictly limited to the points, 'mentioned', in the
questionnaire. The Inspecting Officer. is at liberty to make examination as
varied and as thorough as the requirement of each office necessitates. The
inspection of an Office will chiefly concern the registers and books
prescribed to be maintained in that Office. His principal duty is to see that
powers delegated to officers are not abused, that the rules, regulations and
orders of Government and other competent authorities issued from time to
time are observed in their proper spirit and to draw the attention of the
officers concerned to any irregularities. His duty is to investigate as well as
to educate, to cut down unnecessary and unauthorised duplication of work
and to suggest curtailment, wherever this is possible without sacrificing
efficiency. The tendency of noting every minute error in the Inspection
report and starting correspondence on account thereof should be avoided;
otherwise the will be worse than the disease. Minor points should be corrected on the spot. The Chief points which should receive attention can be
summarised as follows.
(i) Departures from des and oniers;
(ii) Abuse of power;
(iii) Defects in the system of working, rendering possible, among
other things, defalcations and loss of public money, etc.
(iv) Undue prolixity of routine.
156. The Chief Conservator, of Forests should send brief notes or the
Inspections on the accounts of the subordinate offices conducted by him to
the Secretary, Food and Forest Departments. Such brief notes should,
among other things, contain important points of discussions held with the
Departmental Officers, the works turned out, instructions issued thereafter
as a result of such inspections, important points noticed as a result of inspection of offices, etc. Copies of routine Notes of Inspection should not be
sent.
157. The Conservator of Forests should finally deal with the Inspection
reports in respect of inspection of offices conducted by them. However,
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

they should send extract copies of the portions pertaining to accounts to
the Accountant General, Bangalore. Cases of serious irregularities, and
wilful negligence on the part of the officers and other staff including cases
of fraud, embezzlement or loss to Government and matters of special
interest or importance should be reported to the Chief Conservator of
Forests.
158. (1) An inspection Minute book should be maintained in each office m
Form 46 entering therein, within seven days of the receipt of the Inspection
Note, all orders given as the result of the inspection which require specific
action on the part of the office. The steps taken to comply with each order
should be noted by the Superintendent, Manager or the ministerial head of
the office at the end of each month and put up to the officer-incharge. The
later should review the action taken and adopt all necessary steps to carry
out the instructions of the Inspecting Officer as quickly as possible. When
complete action has been taken against any particular instruction or order
the corresponding serial number should be rounded off after filling in
Column 6 of the Minute Book.
(2) An extract of ,the Inspection Minute Book regarding the compliance
action taken on the several instructions and orders should be submitted by
the Presiding Officer to the respective Inspecting Officer within 3 months of
the receipt of the Inspection Note. Similar progress reports should be sent
every month thereafter within 15th of the month till all the instructions are
complied with.
(3) The Inspecting Officers should also see that such compliance reports
are obtained promptly by issuing reminders wherever necessary. For this
purpose, a Check Register should be maintained by each Inspecting
Officer in Form 47 and this should be checked every month by the
Presiding Officer.
159. Sa.1ientpoints requiring the attention of the Inspecting Officers.1nspedion.ofDivisional Forest Offices.-(a) The inspections should,
besides covering account matters, deal with the general conduct of office
business, and manufacturers relating to management to forests under
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

scientific principles. With this object in view, the chief Conservator of
Forests or the Conservator of Forests Should carefully scrutinise (1) the
register of Reserved Forests, Protected Forests and District Forests, (2)
Reserve Forest Books (3) Control books and Forest (Control) Journals and
see that they are properly maintained in the prescribed manner. He should
also examine registers of stock accounts of timber and other produce,
registers of sales of timber and other forest produce, revenue registers,
forest offence registers, lease registers, registers of live and dead stock
register of books and maps, buildings, roads, etc., correspondence register
files, lists of pending papers, objection statements and inspection reports.
Bill and receipt books, etc., should be scrutinised and recoveries and
remittance to treasuries of amounts due to government should be verified
with entries in the cash book, the classified abstract of revenue and
expenditure and the register of remittances. Similarly, the registers of
receipt books, bill books, licence books, permits books. transit pass books,
etc., should be checked and the receipt, issue and balance of those books
verified. The Forest cash books, general cash books and contingent
registers should be carefully scrutinised along with the connected registers
and vouchers.
(b) The list of questions prescribed in the Inspection Report form should be
adopted for the inspection of the Divisional Forest Offices. The result of
these inspections should be communicated to the Divisional Forest Officer
for replies and extract copies of portions pertaining to accounts sent to the
Accountant-General. Matters of special interest or importance should also
be reported to the Chief Conservator of Forests. The Conservator of
Forests shall submit a special report regarding any office which is, at the
time of his inspection, in an unsatisfactory state, with the explanation of the
Divisional Forest Officer concerned. The Divisional Forest Officer should
inform the Conservator of Forests of the action taken on his report, within a
period of 3 months.
160. Inspection of Range Offices.- (a) The Inspecting Officers will,
amongst other matters, see that the registers of Reserved Forests,
protected Forests and District Forests, Control books, control journals and
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

plantation registers are properly posted up in the prescribed manner;
scrutinise the recovery, credit and remittance of revenue items with the
help of bill, receipt, permit and transit pass books; examine the revenue
registers and compare them with the entries in the cash book; and examine
the cash books and check the cash balance in hand at the time of
inspection; The examination of the cash book should be as through as
possible and include a scrutiny of connected registers and vouchers, e.g.
the registers of receipts and issue of passes, licences, bills, receipts; and
other books and forms should be examined with a view to seeing whether
the opening balance in the current registers agrees with the last closing
balance brought over from used up registers, whether the stocks obtained
from the Divisional Forest Office from time to time have been credited in
the registers and the balance correctly carried forward from month to
month, whether the number of books on hand agrees with the balance
shown in the registers. In respect of licenses (Permits), the counterfoils of
at least one month's issues should be compared with the duplicates
received from subordinates .and. triplicates wherever recovered and the
amounts connected should be checked with the credits in the cash book.
He should also see whether the expenditure charged in the cash book is
justified and covered by appropriate sanction of the competent authority
and in case of charges on works they should be verified with the entries in
field note books, measurement books and other connected registers.
(b) Stock accounts of timber and other Forest Produce, registers of live and
dead stock, registers of stores, tools and plant, registers of buildings,
roads, wells, etc., offence register, revenue registers, register of books and
maps, accounts of stationery articles, stamps, uniforms, records of rounds
(Sections) and beats, pay bill and travelling allowance bill registers, should
also be carefully examined and discrepancies, if any, found recorded. Similarly registers of receipts and repayments of deposits, advances, outstandings against contractors and disbursers records of sanctioned works
consolidated works vouchers, recovery of house rent, etc., recovery of
security deposits from subordinates, should be scrutinised by the Divisional
Forest Officer.
(c) The Inspecting Officer should also examine if files have been properly
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

maintained, and Government Orders and circular orders of the department
have been properly filed by the Officer. He should see whether the Range
Forest Officer has maintained the register of Sandal trees declared by
owners of private lands and the register of sandal trees extracted from
private lands and whether the payment of bonus or value of trees extracted
is paid regularly and promptly.
(d) The list of questions prescribed in the Inspection Report form should be
adopted and, results of inspection should be communicated to the subordinate officer for replies. If the inspection has revealed any serious irregularity, the Divisional Forest officer should send a special report to the
Conservator of Forests.
161. Inspection of Timber Depots.-(a) The Inspecting Officer will conduct
inspections of Sa1e Depots of timber in the same manner in which
inspection of Range Offices are conducted, If such inspection includes
stock verification, the stock of timber and other forest produce on hand
should be checked and verified comparing the quantities actually on hand
with those shown in the registers. The transactions of timber and other
forest produce made during the year for which inspection is made should
be thoroughly examined with the connected registers, passes, permits,
hills, receipts, etc. Stock registers, revenue registers, remittance register,
depot receipt books, pass books, bill books, cash receipt books should be
carefully scrutinised to see whether the accounts of timber are properly and
correctly maintained and revenue recoveries are being made regularly
according conditions of sale and whether timely action is being taken to
recover outstanding revenue due on account of sales. Cash books should
be examined and the entries checked with the connected registers,
vouchers, counterfoils of receipts, bills, etc. He should also see if the depot
is properly managed, and the accounts, returns and correspondence are in
good order.
(b) The list of questions prescribed for the 'Inspection Report form’ should
be adopted for the inspection of Depots. The results of inspection should
be communicated to the Depot Officer for replies wherever necessary. A
copy of the Inspection report with .the replies of the Depot Officer should be
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

sent by the Divisional Forest' Officer to the conservator of Forests. If the
inspection has revealed any serious irregularity in procedure or deficit in
stock, a special report should be sent. If the stock verification is done by
the Inspecting Officer, it should be accompanied by a certificate, that the
Inspecting Officer has satisfied himself that the stock on the date of
inspection was correct and agreed with the registers with his remarks, if
any.
(c) The above rule for the inspection of sale depots will be held to apply
mutatis muandis, for the inspection of Forest depots i.e. secondary depots.
162. Inspection of Sandalwood Depots.-(a) The Inspecting Officer will
inspect the sandalwood depots in the same manner in which inspection of
timber sale depots and Range Offices are conducted. If such inspection
includes stock verification, stocks of Sandalwood and other produce, if any,
should be checked and verified comparing the actual stocks on hand with
those shown in the registers. Each class of sandalwood should be weighed
separately by lots, the number of pieces wherever necessary counted and
the weights and numbers compared with the book balance. Deficits, if any,
observed at the time of stock taking should be thoroughly investigated and
recorded, besides taking prompt steps for obtaining sanctions of competent
authorities for the write off such deficits if they are normal and to fix the
responsibilities for deficits that may be due to loss, fraud, theft, etc. Any
excess found at the time of stock taking should be recredited.
(b) Cash books should be scrutinised and the entries checked with the
connected registers, vouchers, counterfoils of receipts, bills, etc. The retail
sale register of sandalwood should be scrutinised thoroughly to see if all
sales are covered by sanctions of competent authorities, the sales are
billed at 'the sanctioned schedule of rates and the realisations credited to
treasury promptly. The weighment register should also be examined
carefully to see if weighments are made and recorded according to, the
prescribed rules. The Register for the sandalwood supplied to Sandalwood
Oil Factories should be examined to see if bills,' are preferred in time and
recoveries effected promptly. Transactions of Sandalwood and other forest
CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

produce relating to the year of inspection should be thoroughly examined
with the connected registers, c;ounterfoils of receipts, passes, permits, bills,
etc. Sandalwood stock registers, revenue registers, sandalwood receipt
books, transit pass books, cash receipt books, bill books, and register of
remittances to treasury should be carefully scrutinised to see whether the
accounts of Sandalwood, received, issued for conversion and outtum
assorted wood, the accounts of sandalwood sold or supplied are. properly
and correctly maintained and revenue recoveries and their remittances to
treasuries are promptly made. He should see if proper security
arrangements for the safe custody of sandalwood and for the proper watch
and ward of the depot are maintained. He should also see if the depot is
properly and efficiently managed, proper discipline maintained and the
accounts, returns and correspondence are in good order.
(c) The list of questions prescribed in 1he Inspection report form for
adoption for Sandalwood Depot inspections should be followed. The results
of inspection should be communicated by the Divisional Forest Officer to
the Depot Officer for replies wherever necessary. A copy of the Inspection
report with the replies of the Depot Officer should be sent to the Conservator of Forests. If the stock verification is done by the Inspecting
Officer, it should be accompanied by a certificate that the Inspecting Officer
has satisfied himself that the stock on the date of inspection was correct
and agreed with the book balance with his remarks for any discrepancies
noticed between the two.

CENTRE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL LAW EDUCATION RESEARCH AND ADVOCACY

